AGAINST THE TWO BREVES OF POPE PAVLVS QVINTVS, AND THE LATE LETTER OF CARDINALL BELLARMINE TO
 G. BLACKWEL THE ARCH-PRIEST. 


 WHAT a monstrous, rare, nay neuer heard-of Treacherous attempt, was
 plotted within these few yeeres here in England, for the destruction of Mee,
my Bed-fellow, and our posteritie, the whole house of Parliament, and a great
number of good subjects of all sorts and degrees; is so famous already through
the whole world by the infamie thereof, as it is needlesse to bee repeated or pub-
lished any more; the horrour of the sinne it selfe doeth so lowdly proclaime it.
For if those crying sinnes, (whereof mention is made in the Scripture) haue that
epithet giuen them for their publique infamie, and for procuring as it were with a
lowd cry from heauen a iust vengeance and recompense, and yet those sinnes are
both old and too common, neither the world, nor any one Countrey being euer at
any time cleane voyd of them: If those sinnes (I say) are said in the Scripture to cry
so lowd; What then must this sinne doe, plotted without cause, infinite in crueltie,
and singular from all examples ? What proceeded hereupon is likewise notorious
to the whole world; our Iustice onely taking hold vpon the offenders, and that in
as honourable and publique a forme of Triall, as euer was vsed in this Kingdome.
 2. For although the onely reason they gaue for plotting so heinous an attempt,
was the zeale they caried to the Romish Religion; yet were neuer any other of
that profession the worse vsed for that cause, as by our gracious Proclamation
immediatly after the discouery of the said fact doeth plainly appeare: onely at
the next sitting downe againe of the Parliament, there were Lawes made, setting
downe some such orders as were thought fit for preuenting the like mischiefe in
time to come. Amongst which a forme of OATH was framed to be taken by my
Subiects, whereby they should make a cleare profession of their resolution, faith-
fully to persist in their obedience vnto mee, according to their naturall allegiance;
To the end that I might hereby make a separation, not onely betweene all my
good Subiets in generall, and vnfathfull Traitors, that intended to withdraw
themselues from my obedience; But specially to make a separation betweene so
many of my Subiects, who although they were otherwise Popishly affected, yet
retained in their hearts the print of their naturall dutie to their Soueraigne; and
those who being caried away with the like fanaticall zeale that the Powder-
Traitors were, could not conteine themselues within the bounds of their naturall
Allegiance, but thought diuersitie of religion a safe pretext for all kinde of trea-


 
 sons, and rebellions against their Soueraigne. Which godly and wise intent, God
 did blesse with successe accordingly: For very many of my Subiects that were
 Popishly affected, aswell Priests, as Layicks, did freely take the same Oath:
 whereby they both gaue me occasion to thinke the better of their fidelitie, and
 likewise freed themselues of that heauie slander, that although they were fellow
 professors of one Religion with the powder-Traitors, yet were they not ioyned
 with them in treasonable courses against their Soueraigne; whereby all quietly
 minded Papists were put of despaire, and I gaue a good proofe that I intended no
 persecution against them for conscience cause, but onely desired to be secured of
 them for ciuill obedience, which for conscience cause they were bound to performe.
 3. But the diuel could not haue deuised a more malicious tricke for interrupting
 this so calme and clement a course, then fell out by the sending hither, and publish-
 ing a Breue of the Popes, countermanding all them of his profession to take this
 Oath; Thereby sowing new seeds of ielousie betweene me and my Popish Subiects,
 by stirring them vp to disobey that lawfull commandement of their Soueraigne,
 which was ordeined to bee taken of them as a pledge of their fidelitie; And so by their
 refusall of so iust a charge, to giue mee so great and iust a ground for punishment of
 them, without touching any matter of conscience: throwing themselues needlesly
 into one of these desperate straits; either with the losse of their lives and goods
 to renounce their Allegiance to their naturall Soueraigne; or else to procure the
 condemnation of their soules by renouncing the Catholicke faith, as he alleadgeth.
 4. And on the other part, although disparitie of Religion (the Pope being head
 of the contrary part) can permit no intelligence nor intercourse of messengers
 betweene mee and the Pope: yet there being no denounced warre betweene vs,
 he hath by this action broken the rules of common ciuilitie and iustice between
 Christian Princes, in thus condemning me vnheard, both by accounting me a perse-
 cutor, which cannot be but implied by exhorting the Papists to endure Martyrdome;
 as likewise by so straitly commanding all those of his profession in England, to refuse
 the taking of this Oath; thereby refusing to professe their naturall obedience to me
 their Soueraigne. For if he thinke himselfe my lawfull Iudge, wherefore hath he
 condemned me vnheard ? And, if he haue nothing to doe with me and my gouern-
 ment (as indeed he hath not) why doeth he mittere falcem in alienam messem , to
 meddle betweene me and my Subiects, especially in matters that meerely and
 onely concerne ciuill obedience ? And yet could Pius Quintus in his greatest fury
 and auowed quarrell against the late Queene, doe no more iniurie vnto her; then
 hee hath in this case offered vnto mee, without so much as a pretended or an
 alleadged cause. For what difference there is, betweene the commanding Subiects
 to rebell, and loosing them from their Oath of Allegiance as Pius Quintus did; and
 the commanding of Subiects not to obey in making profession of their Oath of
 their dutifull Allegiance, as this Pope hath now done: no man can easily discerne.
 5. But to draw neere vnto his Breue , wherein certainely hee hath taken more
paines then he needed, by setting downe in the said Breue the whole body of the

 
 Oath at length; whereas the onely naming of the Title thereof might as well haue
 serued, for any answere hee hath made thereunto (making Vna litura , that is,
 the flat and generall condemnation of the whole Oath to serue for all his refuta-
 tion.) Therein hauing as well in this respect as in the former, dealt both
 vndiscreetly with me, and iniuriously with his owne Catholickes. With mee; in
 not refuting particularly what speciall words he quarrelled in that Oath; which
 if hee had done, it might haue beene that for the fatherly care I haue not to put
 any of my Subiects to a needlesse extremitie, I might haue beene contented in
 some sort to haue reformed or interpreted those wordes. With his owne Catho-
 lickes: for either if I had so done, they had beene thereby fully eased in that
 businesse; or at least if I would not haue condescended to haue altered any thing
 in the saide Oath, yet would thereby some appearance or shadow of excuse haue
 been left vnto them for refusing the same: not as seeming thereby to swarue from
 their Obedience and Allegiance vnto mee, but onely beeing stayed from taking the
 same vpon the scrupulous tendernesse of their consciences, in regard of those
 particular words which the Pope had noted and condemned therein.
 
 And now let vs heare the words of his thunder.

POPE PAVLVS THE FIFT, TO THE ENGLISH CATHOLICKES. 
 WELBELOUED Sonnes, Salutation and Apostolicall Benediction. The tribulations
 and calamities, which yee haue continually sustainedfor the keeping of the Catholike
 Faith, haue alwayes afflicted vs with great griefe of minde. But for as much as we
 vnderstand that at this time all things are more grieuous, our affliction hereby is
 wonderfully increased. For wee haue heard how you are compelled, by most grieuous
 punishments set before you, to goe to the Churches of Heretikes, to frequent their
 assemblies, to be present at their Sermons. Truly wee doe vndoubtedly beleeue, that
 they which with so great constancie and fortitude, haue hitherto indured most cruell
 persecutions and almost infinite miseries, that they may walke without spot in the
 Law of the Lord; will neuer suffer themselves to be defiled with the communion of
 those that haue forsaken the diuine Law. Yet notwithstanding, being compelled by the
 zeale of our Pastorall Office, and by our Fatherly care which we doe continually take
for the saluation of your soules, we are inforced to admonish and desire you, that by
no meanes you come unto the Churches of the Heretickes, or hear their Sermons, or
communicate with them in their Rites, lest you incurre the wrath of God: For these
things may ye not doe without indamaging the worship of God, and your owne sal-
uation. As likewise you cannot, without most euident and grieuous wronging of Gods
Honour, bind your selues by the Oath, which in like maner we haue heard with very
great griefe of our heart is administred vnto you, of the tenor vnder-written. viz. 
 I A.B. doe trewly and sincerely acknowledge, professe, testifie and declare in my
conscience before God and the world, That our Soueraigne Lord King IAMES, is
lawfull King of this Realme, and of all other his Maiesties Dominions and Coun-

 
treyes: And that the Pope neither of himselfe, nor by any authority of the Church
or Sea of Rome , or by any other meanes with any other, hath any power or au-
thoritie to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his Maiesties Kingdomes or
Dominions, or to authorize any forreigne Prince to inuade or annoy him or his
Countreys, or to discharge any of his Subiects of their Allegiance and obedience
to his Maiestie, or to giue Licence or leaue to any of them to beare Armes, raise
tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his Maiesties Royall Person, State or
Gouernment, or to any of his Maiesties subiects within his Maiesties Dominions.
Also I doe sweare from my heart, that, notwithstanding any declaration or
sentence of Excommunication, or depriuation made or granted, or to be made or
granted, by the Pope or his successors, or by any Authoritie deriued, or pretended
to be deriued from him or his Sea, against the said King, his heires or successors,
or any absolution of the said subiects from their obedience; I will beare faith and
trew Allegiance to his Maiestie, his heires and successors, and him and them will
defend to the vttermost of my power, against all conspiracies and attempts what-
soeuer, which shalbe made against his or their Persons, their Crowne and dignitie,
by reason or colour of any such sentence, or declaration, or otherwise, and will doe
my best endeuour to disclose and make knowne vnto his Maiestie, his heires and
successors, all Treasons and traiterous conspiracies, which I shall know or heare
of, to be against him or any of them. And I doe further sweare, That I doe from
my heart abhorre, detest and abiure as impious and Hereticall, this damnable
doctrine and position, That Princes which be excommunicated or depriued by the
 Pope , may be deposed or murthered by their Subiects or any other whatsoeuer.
And I doe beleeue, and in conscience am resolued, that neither the Pope nor any
person whatsoeuer, hath power to absolue me of this Oath, or any part thereof;
which I acknowledge by good and full authoritie to bee lawfully ministred vnto
mee, and doe renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrarie. And all
these things I doe plainely and sincerely acknowledge and sweare, according to
these expresse words by me spoken, and according to the plaine and common sense
and vnderstanding of the same words, without any Equiuocation, or mentall
euasion, or secret reseruation whatsoeuer. And I do make this Recognition and
acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and trewly, vpon the trew faith of a Christian.
So helpe me GOD. 
 
 Which things since they are thus; it must euidently appeare vnto you by the words
themselues, That such an Oath cannot be taken without hurting of the Catholike Faith
and the saluation of your soules; seeing it conteines many things which are flat con-
trary to Faith and saluation. Wherefore wee doe admonish you, that you doe vtterly
abstainefrom taking this and the like Oathes: which thing wee doe the more earnestly
require of you, because wee haue experience of the constancie of your faith, which is
tried like gold in the fire of perpetuall tribulation. Wee doe well know, that you will
cheerfully vnder-goe all kinde of cruell torments whatsoeuer, yea and constantly endure 

 
 death itselfe, rather then you will in any thing offend the Maiestie of God . And this
 our confidence is confirmed by those things, which are dayly reported vnto vs, of the
 singular vertue, valour, and fortitude which in these last times doeth no lesse shine in
 your Martyrs, then it did in the first beginning of the Church. Stand therefore, your
 loynes being girt about with veritie, and hauing on the brest-plate of righteousness,
 taking the shield of Faith, be ye strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might;
 And let nothing hinder you. Hee which will crowne you, and doeth in Heauen behold
 your conflicts, willfinish the good worke which hee hath begun in you. You know how
 hee hath promised his disciples, that hee will neuer leaue them Orphanes: for hee is
 faithfull which hath promised. Hold fast therefore his correction, that is, being rooted
 and grounded in Charitie, whatsoeuer ye doe, whatsoeuer ye indeuour, doe it with one
 accord, in simplicitie of heart, in meekenesse of Spirit, without murmuring or doubt-
 ing. For by this doe all men know that we are the disciples of Christ , if we haue
 loue one to another. Which charitie, as it is very greatly to be desired of all faithfull
 Christians; So certainely it is altogether necessary for you, most blessed sonnes. For
 by this your charitie, the power of the diuel is weakened, who doeth so much assaile you,
 since that power of his is especially vpheld by the contentions and disagreement of our
 sonnes. Wee exhort you therefore by the bowels of our Lord Iesvs Chirst , by whose
 loue we are taken out of the iawes of eternall death; That above all things, you would
 haue mutuall charitie among you. Surely Pope Clement the eight of happy memory,
 hath giuen you most profitable precepts of practising brotherly charitie one to another,
 in his Letters in forme of a Breue, to our welbeloued sonne M. George Arch-priest of
 the Kingdome of England, dated the 5. day of the month of October 1602. Put them
 therefore diligently in practise, and be not hindered by any difficultie or doubtfulnesse.
 We command you that ye doe exactly obserue the words of those letters, and that yee
 take and vnderstand them simply as they sound, and as they lie; all power to interpret
 them otherwise, being taken away. In the meane while, we will neuer cease to pray to
 the Father of Mercies, that he would with pitie behold your afflictions and your paines;
 And that he would keepe and defend you with his continuall protection: whom wee
 doe gently greet with our Apostolicall Benediction. Dated at Rome at S . Marke,
 vnder the Signet of the Fisherman, the tenth of the Calends of October, 1606. the second
 yeere of our Popedome.

THE ANSWERE TO THE FIRST BREVE. 
 FIRST, the Pope expresseth herein his sorrow, for that persecution which the
Catholiques sustaine for the faiths sake. Wherein, besides the maine vntrewth
whereby I am so iniuriously vsed, I must euer auow and maintaine, as the trewth
is according to mine owne knowledge, that the late Queene of famous memory,
neuer punished any Papist for Religion, but that their owne punishment was euer
extorted out of her hands against her will, by their owne misbehauiour, which both
the time and circumstances of her actions will manifestly make proofe of. For
before Pius Quintus his excommunication giuing her ouer for a prey, and setting

 
her Subiects at libertie to rebell, it is well knowne she neuer medled with the blood
or hard punishment of any Catholique, nor made any rigorous Lawes against
them. And since that time, who list to compare with an indifferent eye, the mani-
fold intended inuasions against her whole kingdome, the forreine practises, the
internall publike rebellions, the priuate plots and machinations, poysonings,
murthers, and all sorts of deuises, & quid non ? daily set abroach; and all these
wares continually fostered and fomented from Rome ; together with the con-
tinuall corrupting of her Subiects, as well by temporall bribes, as by faire and
specious promises of eternall felicitie; and nothing but booke vpon booke pub-
likely set foorth by her fugitiues, for approbation of so holy designes: who list, I
say, with an indifferent eye, to looke on the one part, vpon those infinite and intol-
lerable temptations, and on the other part vpon the iust, yet moderate punish-
ment of a part of these hainous offendors; shall easily see that that blessed
defunct LADIE was as free from persecution, as they shall free these hellish
Instruments from the honour of martyrdome.
 5. But now hauing sacrificed (if I may so say) to the Manes of my late Pre-
decessour, I may next with Saint Pavl iustly vindicate mine owne fame, from
those innumerable calumnies spread against me, in testifying the trewth of my
behauiour toward the Papists: wherein I may trewly affirme, That whatsoeuer was
her iust and mercifull Gouernement ouer the Papists in her time, my Gouerne-
ment ouer them since hath so farre exceeded hers, in Mercie and Clemencie, as
not onely the Papists themselues grewe to that height of pride, in confidence of my
mildnesse, as they did directly expect, and assuredly promise to themselues
libertie of Conscience, and equalitie with other of my Subiects in all things; but
euen a number of the best and faithfulliest of my sayde Subiects, were cast in
great feare and amazement of my course and proceedings, euer prognosticating
and iustly suspecting that sowre fruite to come of it, which shewed it selfe clearely
in the Powder-Treason. How many did I honour with Knighthood, of knowen
and open Recusants ? How indifferently did I giue audience, and accesse to both
sides, bestowing equally all fauours and honours on both professions ? How free
and continuall accesse, had all rankes and degrees of Papists in my Court and
company ? And aboue all, how frankely and freely did I free Recusants of their
ordinarie paiments ? Besides, it is euident what strait order was giuen out of my
owne mouth to the Iudges, to spare the execution of all Priests, (notwithstanding
their conuiction,) ioyning thereunto a gracious Proclamation, whereby all Priests,
that were at libertie, and not taken, might goe out of the contrey by such a day:
my generall Pardon hauing beene extended to all conuicted Priestes in prison:
whereupon they were set at libertie as good Subiects: and all Priests that were
taken after, sent over and set at libertie there. But time and paper will faile me
to make enumeration of all the benefits and fauours that I bestowed in generall
and particular vpon Papists: in recounting whereof, euery scrape of my penne
would serue but for a blot of the Popes ingratitude and iniustice, in meating me

 
 with so hard a measure for the same. So as I thinke I haue sufficiently, or at least
 with good reason wiped the teares from the Popes eyes, for complaining vpon such
 persecution, who if hee had beene but politickely wise, although hee had had no
 respect to Iustice and Veritie, would haue in this complaint of his, made a dif-
 ference betweene my present time, and the time of the late Queene: And so by
 his commending of my moderation, in regard of former times, might haue had
 hope to haue mooued me to haue continued in the same clement course: For it is a
 trew saying, that alledged kindnesse vpon noble mindes, doeth euer worke much.
 And for the maine vntrewth of any persecution in my time, it can neuer bee
 prooued, that any were, or are put to death since I came to the Crowne for cause
 of Conscience; except that now this discharge giuen by the Pope to all Catholiques
 to take their Oath of Allegiance to me, be the cause of the due punishment of
 many: which if it fall out to be, let the blood light vpon the Popes head, who is the
 onely cause thereof.
 
 As for the next point contained in his Breue concerning his discharge of all
Papists to come to our Church, or frequent our rites and ceremonies, I am not to
meddle at this time with that matter, because my errand now onely is to publish
to the world the Iniurie and Iniustice done vnto me, in discharging my subiects
to make profession of their obedience vnto mee. Now as to the point where the
Oath is quarrelled, it is set downe in few, but very weighty words; to wit, That
it ought to be cleare vnto all Catholiques, that this Oath cannot bee taken with safetie of
the Catholique Faith, and of their soules health, since it containeth many things that
are plainely and directly contrarie to their faith and saluation . To this, the old
saying fathered vpon the Philosopher, may very fitly bee applied, Multa dicit, sed
pauca probat ; nay indeed, Nihil omnino probat : For how the profession of the
naturall Allegiance of Subiects to their Prince can be directly opposite to the faith
and saluation of soules, is so farre beyond my simple reading in Diuinitie, as I
must thinke it a strange and new Assertion, to proceed out of the mouth of that
pretended generall Pastor of all Christian soules. I reade indeede, and not in one,
or two, or three places of Scripture, that Subiects are bound to obey their Princes
for conscience sake, whether they were good or wicked Princes. So said the people
to Ioshua, As wee obeyed Moses in all things, so will wee obey thee . So the Pro-
phet commanded the peoples to obey the King of Babel, saying, Put your neckes
vnder the yoke of the King of Babel, and serue him and his people, that yee may liue. 
So were the children of Israel, vnto Pharaoh , desiring him to let them goe: so to
 Cyrus , obtaining leaue of him to returne to build the Temple: and in a word, the
Apostle willed all men to bee subiect to the higher powers for conscience sake. 
Agreeable to the Scriptures did the Fathers teach. Augustine speaking of Iulian, 
saith, Iulian was an vnbeleeuing Emperour: was hee not an Apostata, an Oppressour,
and an Idolater ? Christian Souldiers serued that vnbeleeuing Emperour: when 

 

 they came to the cause of CHRIST, they would acknowledge no Lord, but him that is in
heauen. When hee would haue them to worship Idoles and to sacrifice, they preferred 
GOD before him: But when he said, Goe forth to fight, inuade such a nation, they
presently obeyed. They distinguished their eternall Lord from their temporall, and
yet were they subiect euen vnto their temporall Lord, for his sake that was their
eternall Lord and Master . Tertullian fayth, A Christian is enemie to no man,
much lesse to the Prince, whom hee knoweth to bee appointed of God; and so of
necessitie must loue, reuerence and honour him, and wish him safe with the whole
Romane Empire, so long as the world shall last: for so long shall it endure. Wee
honour therefore the Emperour in such sort, as is lawfull for vs, and expedientfor him,
as a man, the next vnto God, and obtaining from God, whatsoeuer hee hath, and onely
inferiour vnto God. This the Emperour himselfe would: for so is hee greater then all,
while hee is inferiour onely to the trew God. Iustine Martyr; Wee onely adore the
Lord, and in all other things cheerefully performe seruice to you, professing that you
are Emperours and Princes of men . Ambrose; I may lament, weepe, and sigh: My
tears are my weapons against their armes, souldiers, and the Gothes also: such are
the weapons of a Priest: Otherwise, neither ought I, neither can I resist . Optatus; 
 Ouer the Emperour, there is none but onely God, that made the Emperour . And
 Gregory writing to Mauritius about a certaine Law, that a Souldier should not be
receiued into a Monasterie, nondum expleta militia, The Almightie God , sayeth hee,
 holdes him guiltie, that is not vpright to the most excellent Emperour in all things that
hee doeth or speaketh . And then calling himselfe the vnworthy seruant of his
Godlinesse, goeth on the whole Epistle to shewe the iniustice of that Lawe, as hee
pretendeth: and in the end concludes his Epistle with these wordes; I being
subiect to your command, haue caused the same Law to be sent through diuers parts of
your Dominions: and because the Law it selfe doeth not agree to the Law of the
Almightie God, I haue signified the same by my Letters to your most excellent Lord-
ship: so that on both parts I haue payed what I ought; because I haue yeelded
obedience to the Emperour, and haue not holden my peace, in what I thought for God. 
Now how great a contrarietie there is, betwixt this ancient Popes action in obey-
ing an Emperour by the publication of his Decree, which in his owne conscience
hee thought vnlawfull, and this present Popes prohibition to a Kings Subiects
from obedience vnto him in things most lawfull and meere temporall; I remit it
to the Readers indifferencie. And answerably to the Fathers, spake the Councels
in their Decrees. As the Councell of Arles , submitting the whole Councell to the
Emperour in these wordes; These things wee haue decreed to be presented to our
Lord the Emperour, beseeching his Clemencie, that if wee haue done lesse then wee
ought, it may be supplyed by his wisdome: if any thing otherwise then reason re- 

 
 quireth, it may be corrected by his iudgement: if any thing be found fault with by vs
 with reason, it may be perfected by his aide with Gods fauourable assistance. 
 
 But why should I speak of Charles the great, to whome not one Councell, but
 sixe seuerall Councels, Frankeford, Arles, Tours, Chalons, Ments and Rhemes did
 wholly submit themselues ? and not rather speake of all the generall Councels,
 that of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon , and the foure other commonly
 so reputed, which did submit themselues to the Emperours wisedome and piety
 in all things ? Insomuch as that of Ephesus repeated it foure seuerall times,
 That they were summoned by the Emperours Oracle, becke, charge and command, and
 betooke themselues to his Godlinesse; beseeching him, that the Decrees made against
 Nestorius and his followers, might by his power have their full force and validitie, as
 appeareth manifestly in the Epistle of the generall Councell of Ephesus written
 ad Augustos . I also reade that Christ said, His kingdome was not of this world, 
 bidding, Giue to Caesar what was Caesars, and to God what was Gods . And I euer
 held it for an infallible Maxime in Diuinitie, That temporall obedience to a tem-
 porall Magistrate, did nothing repugne to matters of faith or saluation of soules:
 But that euer temporall obedience was against faith and saluation of soules, as in
 this Breue is alledged, was neuer before heard nor read of in the Christian Church.
 And therefore I would haue wished the Pope , before hee had set downe this com-
 mandement to all Papists here, That, since in him is the power by the infabillity
 of his spirit, to make new Articles of Faith when euer it shall please him; he had
 first set it downe for an Article of Faith, before he had commended all Catho-
 likes to beleeue and obey it. I will then conclude the answere to this point in a
 Dilemma. 
 
 Either it is lawfull to obey the Soueraigne in temporal things, or not.
 1. If it be lawfull (as I neuer heard nor read it doubted of) then why is the
 Pope so vniust, and so cruell towards his owne Catholikes, as to command them
 to disobey their Soueraignes lawfull commandement ?
 2. If it be vnlawfull, why hath hee neither expressed any one cause or reason
thereof, nor yet will giue them leaue (nay rather hee should command and per-
swade them in plaine termes) not to liue vnder a King whom vnto they ought no
obedience ?
 
 And as for the vehement exhortation vnto them to perseuere in constancie, and
to suffer Martyrdome and all tribulation for this cause; it requireth no other
answer then onely this, That if the ground be good whereupon hee hath com-
maunded them to stand, then exhortation to constancie is necessarie: but if the
ground be vniust and naught (as indeed it is, and I haue in part already proued)
then this exhortation of his can worke no other effect, then to make him guilty of
the blood of so many of his sheepe, whom hee doeth thus wilfully cast away; not
onely to the needlesse losse of their liues, and ruine of their families, but euen to

 

the laying on of a perpetuall slander vpon all Papists; as if no zealous Papist
could be a trew subiect to his Prince; and that the profession of that Religion,
and the Temporall obedience to the Ciuill Magistrate, were two things repugnant
and incompatible in themselues. But euill information, and vntrew reports 
(which being caried so farre as betweene this and Rome , cannot but increase by
the way) might haue abused the Pope , and made him dispatch this Breue so 
rashly: For that great Citie, Queene of the World, and as themselues confesse, 
mystically Babylon , cannot but be so full of all sorts of Intelligencies. Besides, all
complainers (as the Catholikes here are) be naturally giuen to exaggerate their
owne griefs, and multiply thereupon: So that it is no wonder, that euen a iust
ludge sitting there, should vpon wrong information, giue an vnrighteous sentence;
as some of their owne partie doe not sticke to confesse, That Pius Quintus was too
rashly caried vpon wrong information, to pronounce his thunder of Excommuni-
cation vpon the late Queene. And it may be, the like excuse shall hereafter be
made for the two Breues , which Clemens Octauus sent to England immediatly
before her death, for debarring me of the Crowne, or any other that either would
professe, or any wayes tolerate the professours of our Religion; contrary to his
manifold vowes and protestations, simul & eodem tempore , and as it were, deliuered
 vno & eodem spiritu , to diuers of my ministers abroad, professing such kindnesse,
and shewing such forwardnesse to aduance me to this Crowne. Nay, the most
part of Catholikes here, finding this Breue when it came to their handes to bee so
farre against Diuinitie, Policie, or naturall sense, were firmely perswaded that it
was but a counterfeit Libell, deuised in hatred of the Pope; or at the farthest, a
thing hastily done vpon wrong information, as was before said. Of which opinion
were not onely the simpler sort of Papists, but euen some amongst them of best
account, both for learning and experience; whereof the Archpriest himselfe was
one: But for soluing of this obiection, the Pope himselfe hath taken new paines
by sending foorth a second Breue , onely for gluing faith and confirmation to the
former; That whereas before, his sinne might haue beene thought to haue pro-
ceeded from rashnesse and mis-information, he will now willfully and willingly
double the same; whereof the Copy followeth.

TO OVR BELOVED SONNES THE ENGLISH CATHOLIKES,
 PAULUS P. P. V tus . 
 BELOUED sonnes, Salutation and Apostolicall Benediction. It is reported vnto vs,
that there are found certaine amongst you, who when as we haue sufficiently declared
by our Letters, dated the last yeere on the tenth of the Calends of October in the forme
of a Breue, that yee cannot with safe Conscience take the Oath, which was then re- 

 
 quired of you; and when as wee haue further straitly commanded you, that by no
 meanes yee should take it: yet there are some, I say, among you, which dare now
 affirme, that such Letters concerning the forbidding of the Oath, were not written of our
 owne accord, or of our owne proper will, but rather for the respect and at the instiga-
 tion of other men. And for that cause the same men doe goe about to perswade you,
 that our commands in the said Letters are not to be regarded. Surely this newes did
 trouble vs; and that so much the more, because hauing had experience of your obedience
 (most dearly beloued sonnes) who to the end ye might obey this holy Sea, haue godlily
 and valiantly contemned your riches, wealth, honour, libertie, yea and life it selfe; wee
 should neuer haue suspected that the trewth of our Apostolike Letters could once be
 called into question among you, that by this pretence ye might exempt your selues from
 our Commandements. But we doe herein perceiue the subtiltie and craft of the enemie
 of mans saluation, and we doe attribute this your backwardnesse rather to him, then
 to your owne will. And for this cause, wee haue thought good to write the second time
 vnto you, and to signifie vnto you againe, That our Apostolike Letters dated the last
 yeere on the tenth of the Calends of October, concerning the prohibition of the Oath,
 were written not only vpon our proper motion, and of our certaine knowledge, but
 also after long and weightie deliberation vsed concerning all those things, which
 are contained in them; and that for that cause ye are bound fully to obserue them,
 reiecting all interpretation perswading to the contrary. And this is our meere,
 pure, and perfect will, being alwayes carefull of your saluation, and alwayes minding
 those things, which are most profitable vnto you. And we doe pray without ceasing,
 that hee that hath appointed our lowlinesse to the keeping of the flocke of Christ,
 would inlighten our thoughts and our counsels: whom we doe also continually desire,
 that he would increase in you (our beloued Sonnes) faith, constancie, and mutuall
 charitie and peace one to another. All whom, we doe most louingly blesse with all
 charitable affection.
 Dated at Rome at Saint Markes vnder the Signet of the Fisherman, the x. of the
Calends of September, 1607. the third yeere of our Popedome.

THE ANSWERE TO THE SECOND BREVE. 
 Now for this Breue , I may iustly reflect his owne phrase vpon him, in tearming it
to be The craft of the Deuill . For if the Deuill had studied a thousand yeeres, for
to finde out a mischiefe for our Catholikes heere, hee hath found it in this: that
now when many Catholikes haue taken their Oath, and some Priests also; yea,
the Arch-priest himselfe, without compunction or sticking, they shall not now
onely be bound to refuse the profession of their naturall Allegiance to their
Soueraigne, which might yet haue beene some way coloured vpon diuers scruples
conceiued vpon the words of the Oath; but they must now renounce and for-
sweare their profession of obedience alreadie sworne, and so must as it were at the
third instance forsweare their former two Oathes, first closely sworne, by their



 

birth in their naturall Allegiance; and next, clearly confirmed by this Oath, which
doeth nothing but expresse the same: so as no man can now holde the faith, or
procure the saluation of his soule in England that must not abiure and renounce
his borne and sworne Allegiance to his naturall Soueraigne.
 
 And yet it is not sufficient to ratifie the last yeeres Breue , by a new one come
 forth this yeere; but (that not onely euery yeere, but euery moneth may produce
 a new monster) the great and famous Writer of the Controuersies, the late
 vn-Iesuited Cardinall Bellarmine , must adde his talent to this good worke, by
 blowing the bellowes of sedition, and sharpening the spurre to rebellion, by send-
 ing such a Letter of his to the Arch-priest here, as it is a wonder how passion,
 and an ambitious desire of maintaining that Monarchie, should charme the wits
 of so famously learned a man.
 
 The Copy whereof here followeth.

TO THE VERY REVEREND Mr. GEORGE BLACKWELL, ARCH-PRIEST OF THE ENGLISH: ROBERT BELLARMINE CARDINALL OF THE
 HOLY CHURCH OF ROME, GREETING. 

 Reuerend Sir , and brother in Christ ; It is almost fourtie yeeres since we did see
one the other: but yet I haue bene vnmindfull of our ancient acquaintance, neither haue
I ceased seeing I could doe you no other good, to commend your labouring most pain-
fully in the Lords Vineyard, in my prayers to God. And I doubt not, but that I haue
liued all this while in your memory, and haue had some place in your prayers at the
Lords Altar. So therefore euen vnto this time we haue abidden, as S. Iohn speaketh,
in the mutall loue one of the other, not by word or letter, but in deed and trewth. But
a late message which was brought vnto vs within these few dayes, of your bonds and
imprisonment, hath inforced mee to breake off this silence; which message, although
it seemed heauie in regard of the losse which that Church hath receiued, by their being
thus depriued of the comfort of your pastorall function amongst them, yet withall it
seemed ioyous, because you drew neere vnto the glory of Martyrdome, then the which
gift of God there is none more happy; That you, who haue fedde your flocke so many
yeeres with the word and doctrine, should now feed it more gloriously by the example
of your patience. But another heauie tidings did not a little disquiet and almost take
away this ioy, which immediatly followed, of the aduersaries assault, and per aduen-
ture of the slip and fall of your constancie in refusing an vnlawfull Oath. Neither
trewly (most deare brother) could that Oath therefore bee lawfull, because it was offered
in sort tempered and modified: for you know that those kinde of modifications are
nothing else, but sleights and subtilties of Satan, that the Catholique faith touching the
Primacie of the Sea Apostolike, might either secretly or openly be shot at; for the
which faith so many worthy Martyrs euen in that very England it selfe, haue resisted
vnto blood. For most certaine it is, that in whatsoeuer words the Oath is conceiued by,
the aduersaries of the faith in that Kingdome, it tends to this end, that the Authoritie 

 
 of the head of the Church in England, may bee transferred from the successour of 
 S. Peter, to the successour of King Henry the eight: For that which is pretended of
 the danger of the Kings life, if the high Priest should haue the same power in England,
 which hee hath in all other Christian Kingdomes, it is altogether idle, as all that haue
 any vnderstanding, may easily perceiue. For it was neuer heard of from the Churches
 infancie vntill this day, that euer any Pope did command, that any Prince, though an
 Heretike, though an Ethnike, though a persecutour, should be murdered; or did
 approue of the fact, when it was done by any other. And why, I pray you, doeth onely
 the King of Englandfeare that, which none of all other the Princes in Christendome
 either doeth feare, or euer did feare ? 
 
 But, as I said, these vaine pretexts are but the traps and stratagemes of Satan:
 Of which kinde I could produce not a fewe out of ancient Stories, if I went about to
 write a Booke and not an Epistle. One onely for example sake, I will call to your
 memory . S. Gregorius Nazianzenus in his first Oration against Iulian the Em-
 perour, reporteth, That hee, the more easily to beguile the simple Christians, did insert
 the Images of the false gods into the pictures of the Emperour, which the Romanes did
 vse to bow downe vnto with a ciuill kinde of reuerence: so that no man could doe
 reuerence to the Emperours picture, but withall hee must adore the Images of the false
 gods; whereupon it came to passe that many were deceiued. And if there were any
 that found out the Emperours craft, and refused to worship his picture, those were most
 grieuously punished, as men that had contemned the Emperour in his Image. Some
 such like thing, me thinkes, I see in the Oath that is offered to you; which is so craftily
 composed, that no man can detest Treason against the King, and make profession of
 his Ciuill subiection, but he must bee constrained perfidiously to denie the Primacie
 of the Apostolicke Sea. But the seruants of Christ, and especially the chiefe Priests
 of the Lord, ought to bee so farre from taking an vnlawfull Oath, where they may
 indamage the Faith, that they ought to beware that they giue not the least suspicion of
 dissimulation that they haue taken it, least they might seeme to haue left any example
 of preuarication tofaithfull people. Which thing that worthy Eleazar did most notably
 performe, who would neither eate swines flesh, nor so much as faine to haue eaten it,
 although hee sawe the great torments that did hang ouer his head; least, as himselfe
 speaketh in the second Booke of the Machabees, many young men might bee brought
 through that simulation, to preuaricate with the Lawe. Neither did Basil the Great
 by his example, which is more fit for our purpose, cary himselfe lesse worthily toward 
 Valens the Emperour. For as Theodoret writeth in his Historie, when the Deputy of
 that heretical Emperour did perswade Saint Basil, that hee would not resist the
 Emperour for a little subtiltie of afew points of doctrine; that most holy and prudent
 man made answere , That it was not to be indured, that the least syllable of Gods
 word should be corrupted, but rather all kind of torment was to be embraced,
 for the maintenance of the Trewth thereof. Now I suppose, that there wants not
 amongst you, who say that they are but subtilties of Opinions that are contained in the
Oath that is offered to the Catholikes, and that you are not to striue against the Kings 

 
 Authoritie for such a little matter. But there are not wanting also amongst you holy
men like vnto Basil the Great, which will openly auow, that the very least syllable of
Gods diuine Trewth is not to bee corrupted, though many torments were to bee en-
dured, and death it selfe set before you: Amongst whom it is meete, that you should bee
one, or rather the Standard-bearer, and Generall to the rest. And whatsoeuer hath
beene the cause, that your Constancie hath quailed, whether it bee the suddaineness of
your apprehension, or the bitternesse of your persecution, or the imbecilitie of your old
age: yet wee trust in the goodnesse of God, and in your owne long continued vertue,
that it will come to passe, that as you seeme in some part to haue imitated the fall of 
Peter and Marcellinus, so you shall happily imitate their valour in recouering your
strength, and maintaining the Trewth: For if you will diligently weigh the whole
matter with your selfe, trewly you shall see, it is no small matter that is called in ques-
tion by this Oath, but one of the principall heads of our Faith, and foundations of
Catholique Religion. For heare what your Apostle Saint Gregorie the Great hath
written in his 24. Epistle of his II. Booke . Let not the reuerence due to the Apos-
tolique Sea, be troubled by any mans presumption; for then the state of the
members doeth remaine entire, when the Head of the Faith is not bruised by any
iniurie: Therefore by Saint Gregories testimonie, when they are busie about disturbing
or diminishing, or taking away of the Primacie of the Apostolique Sea; then are they
busie about cutting of the very head of the faith, and dissoluing of the state of the whole
body, and of all the members. Which selfe same thing S. Leo doth confirme in his
third Sermon of his Assumption to the Popedom, when he saith , Our Lord had a
special care of Peter , & praied properly for Peters faith, as though the state of
others were more stable, when their Princes mind was not to be ouercome. Where-
upon himselfe in his Epistle to the bishops of the prouince of Vienna, doth not doubt
to affirme , that he is not partaker of the diuine Mysterie, that dare depart from the
solidity of Peter, who also saith , That who thinketh the Primacy to be denied to
that Sea, he can in no sort lessen the authority of it; but by being puft vp with
the spirit of his owne pride, doth cast himselfe headlong into hel. These and many
many other of this kind, I am very sure are most familiar to you: who besides many
other books, haue diligently read ouer the visible Monarchy of your owne Sanders, a
most diligent writer, and one who hath worthily deserued of the Church of England
 Neither can you be ignorant, that these most holy and learned men , Iohn bishop of 
Rochester, and Tho. Moore, within our memory, for this one most weighty head of
doctrine, led the way to Martyrdome to many others, to the exceeding glory of the
English nation. But I would put you in remembrance that you should take heart,
and considering the weightines of the cause, not to trust too much to your owne
iudgement, neither be wise aboue that is meet to be wise: and if peraduenture your
fall haue proceeded not vpon want of consideration, but through humane infirmity, &
for feare of punishment and imprisonment, yet do not preferre a temporall liberty to
the liberty of the glory of the Sonnes of God: neither for escaping a light & momentarie
tribulation, lose an eternal weight of glory, which tribulation it selfe doeth worke in you. 



 
 You haue fought a good fight a long time, you haue wel-neere finished your course; so
 many yeeres haue you kept the faith: do not therefore lose the reward of such labors
 do not depriue your selfe of that crowne of righteousnes, which so long agone is pre-
 pared for you; Do not make the faces of so many yours both brethren and children
 ashamed. Vpon you at this time are fixed the eyes of all the Churches: yea also, you
 are made a spectacle to the world, to Angels, to men; Do not so carry your selfe in this
 your last act, that you leaue nothing but laments to your friends, and ioy to your
 enemies. But rather on the contrary, which we assuredly hope, and for which we
 continually powre forth prayers to God, display gloriously the banner of faith, and
 make to reioyce the Church, which you haue made heauy; so shall you not onely
 merite pardon at Gods hands, but a Crowne. Farewell. Quite you like a man, and
 let your heart be strengthened. From Rome the 28. day of September 1607. 
 

 Your very Reuerendships brother and seruant in Christ, 
 Robert Bellarmine Cardinall.

THE ANSWERE TO THE CARDINALS LETTER. 
 AND now that I am to enter into the field against him by refuting his Letter, I
must first vse this protestation; That no desire of vaine-glory by matching with
so learned a man, maketh me to vndertake this taske; but onely the care and
conscience I haue, that such smooth Circes charmes and guilded pilles, as full of
exterior eloquence, as of inward vntrewths, may not haue that publike passage
through the world without an answere: whereby my reputation might vniustly
be darkened, by such cloudie and foggie mists of vntrewths and false imputations,
the hearts of vnstayed and simple men be misse-led, and the trewth it selfe
smothered.
 
 But before I come to the particular answere of this Letter, I must here desire
the world to wonder with me, at the committing of so grosse an errour by so
learned a man: as that he should haue pained himselfe to haue set downe so
elaborate a Letter, for the refutation of a quite mistaken question: For it ap-
peareth, that our English Fugitiues, of whose inward societie with him he so
greatly vaunteth, haue so fast hammered in his head the Oath of Supremacie,
which hath euer bene so great a scarre vnto them, as he thinking by his Letter to
haue refuted the last Oath, hath in place thereof onely paied the Oath of Supre-
macie, which was most in his head; as a man that being earnestly caried in his
thoughts vpon another matter, then he is presently in doing, will often name the
matter or person he is thinking of, in place of the other thing he hath at that time
in hand.
 
 For as the Oath of Supremacie was deuised for putting a difference betweene
Papists, and them of our profession: so was this Oath, which hee would seeme to
impugne, ordained for making difference betweene the ciuilly obedient Papists,
and the peruerse disciples of the Powder-Treason. Yet doeth all his Letter runne

 

vpon an Inuectiue against the compulsion of Catholiques to deny the authoritie
of S. Peters successors, and in place thereof to acknowledge the Successors of
King Henry the eight : For in K. Henry the eights time, was the Oath of Supremacie
first made: By him were Thomas Moore and Roffensis put to death, partly for
refusing of it: From his time till now, haue all the Princes of this land professing
this Religion, successiuely in effect maintained the same: and in that Oath onely
is contained the Kings absolute power, to be Iudge ouer all persons, aswell Ciuill
as Ecclesiastical, excluding al forraigne powers and Potentates to be Iudges
within his dominions; whereas this last made Oath containeth no such matter,
onely medling with the ciuill obedience of Subiects to their Soueraigne, in meere
temporall causes.
 
 And that it may the better appeare, that whereas by name hee seemeth to
condemne the last Oath; yet indeed his whole Letter runneth vpon nothing, but
vpon the condemnation of the Oath of Supremacie: I haue here thought good to
set downe the said Oath, leauing it then to the discretion of euery indifferent
reader to iudge, whether he doth not in substance onely answere to the Oath of
Supremacie, but that hee giues the child a wrong name.

 I A.B. doe vtterly testifie and declare in my conscience, that the Kings Highnesse is the
onely Supreame Gouernour of this Realme, and all other his Highnesse Dominions
and Countries, aswell in all Spirituall, or Ecclesiasticall things or causes, as Tem-
porall: And that no forraine Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, hath or
ought to haue any Iurisdiction, Power, Superioritie, Preeminence or Authoritie
Ecclesasticall or Spirituall within this Realme. And therefore I doe vtterly renounce
and forsake all forraine Iurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities; and
doe promise thatfrom hencefoorth I shall beare faith and trew Allegiance to the Kings
Highnesse, his Heires and lawfull Successours: and to my power shall assist and
defend all Iurisdictions, Priuiledges, Preeminences and Authorities granted or
belonging to the Kings Highnesse, his Heires and Successours, or vnited and annexed
to the Imperiall Crowne of the Realme: So helpe me God; and by the Contents of this
booke. 
 
 And that the iniustice, as well as the error of his grosse mistaking in this point,
may yet be more clearely discouered; I haue also thought good to insert here
immediatly after the Oath of Supremacie, the contrary conclusions to all the
points and Articles, whereof this other late Oath doeth consist: whereby it may
appeare, what vnreasonable and rebellious points hee would driue my Subiects
vnto, by refusing the whole body of that Oath, as it is concei ed: For he that
shall refuse to take this Oath, must of necessitie hold all, or some of these pro-
positions following.
 
 1. That I King Iames , am not the lawfull King of this Kingdome, and of all
other my Dominions. 
 2. That the Pope by his owne authoritie may depose me: If not by his owne
authoritie, yet by some other authoritie of the Church, or of the Sea of Rome: 

 
If not by some other authoritie of the Church and Sea of Rome , yet by other
meanes with others helpe, he may depose me. 
 3. That the Pope may dispose of my Kingdomes and Dominions. 
 4. That the Pope may giue authoritie to some forreine Prince to inuade my
Dominions. 
 5. That the Pope may discharge my Subiects of their Allegiance and Obe-
dience to me. 
 6. That the Pope may giue licence to one, or more of my Subiects to beare
armes against me. 
 7. That the Pope may giue leaue to my Subiects to offer violence to my
Person, or to my gouernement, or to some of my Subiects. 
 8. That if the Pope shall by Sentence excommunicate or depose mee, my
Subiects are not to beare Faith and Allegiance to me. 
 9. If the Pope shall by Sentence excommunicate or depose me, my Subiects
are not bound to defend with all their power my Person and Crowne. 
 10. If the Pope shall giue out any Sentence of Excommunication or Depri-
uation against me, my Subiects by reason of that Sentence, are not bound to
reueale all Conspiracies and Treasons against mee, which shall come to their
hearing and knowledge. 
 11. That it is not hereticall and detestable to hold, that Princes being excom-
municated by the Pope , may be either deposed or killed by their Subiects, or any
other. 
 12. That the Pope hath power to absolue my Subiects from this Oath, or
from some part thereof. 
 13. That this Oath is not administred to my Subiects, by a full and lawfull
authoritie. 
 14. That this Oath is to be taken with Equiuocation, mentall euasion, or
secret reseruation; and not with the heart and good will, sincerely in the trew
faith of a Christian man. 
 
 These are the trew and naturall branches of the body of this Oath. The
affirmatiue of all which negatiues, doe neither concerne in any case the Popes 
Supremacie in Spirituall causes: nor yet were euer concluded, and defined by any
complete generall Councell to belong to the Popes authoritie; and their owne
schoole Doctors are at irreconciliable oddes and iarres about them.
 
 And that the world may yet farther see ours and the whole States setting
downe of this Oath, did not proceed from any new inuention of our owne, but as
it is warranted by the word of God : so doeth it take the example from an Oath
of Allegiance decreed a thousand yeeres agone, which a famous Councell then,
together with diuers other Councels, were so farre from condemning (as the Pope 
now hath done this Oath) as I haue thought good to set downe their owne wordes
here in that purpose: whereby it may appear that I craue nothing now of my
 

Subiects in this Oath, which was not expresly and carefully commaunded then,
by the Councels to be obeyed without exception of persons. Nay not in the very
particular point of Equiuocation , which I in this Oath was so carefull to haue
eschewed: but you shall here see the said Councels in their Decrees, as carefull
to prouide for the eschewing of the same; so as almost euery point of that action,
& this of ours shalbe found to haue relation & agreeance one with the other, saue
onely in this, that those old Councels were careful and strait in commanding the
taking of the same: whereas by the contrary, he that now vanteth himselfe to be
head of al Councels, is as careful & strait in the prohibition of all men from the
taking of this Oath of Allegiance.
 

 The words of the Councell be these:

 Heare our sentence. 
 
 Whosoeuer of vs, or of all the people thorowout all Spaine, shall goe about by any
meanes of conspiracie or practise, to violate the Oath of his fidelitie, which he hath
taken for the preseruation of his Countrey, or of the Kings life; or who shall attempt
to put violent handes vpon the King; or to depriue him of his kingly power; or that
by tyrannicall presumption would vsurpe the Soueraigntie of the Kingdome: Let him
bee accursed in the sight of God the Father, and of his Angels; and let him bee made
and declared a stranger from the Catholique Church, which hee hath prophaned by his
periurie; and an aliant from the companies of all Christian people, together with all
the complices of his impietie; because it behooueth all those that bee guiltie of the like
offence, to vnder-lie the like-punishment. Which sentence is three seuerall times
together, and almost in the same wordes, repeated in the same Canon. After
this, the Synode desired, That this Sentence of theirs now this third time rehearsed,
might bee confirmed by the voyce and consent of all that were present. Then the whole
Clergie and people answered, Whosoeuer shall cary himselfe presumptuously against
this your definitiue sentence, let them be Anathema maranatha, that is, let them bee
vtterly destroyed at the Lords comming, and let them and their complices haue their
portion with Iudas Iscarioth. Amen. 
 
 And in the fifth Councell, there it is decreed, That this Acte touching the
Oath of Allegiance, shall bee repeated in euery Councell of the Bishops of Spaine. 
The Decree is in these wordes: In consideration that the mindes of men are easily
inclined to euill and forgetfulnesse, therefore this most holy Synode hath ordained;
and doeth enact, That in euery Councell of the Bishops of Spaine, the Decree of the
generall Councell which was made for the safetie of our Princes, shall bee with an
audible voyce proclaimed and pronounced, after the conclusion of all other things in
the Synode: That so it being often sounded into their eares, at least by continuall
remembrance, the mindes of wicked men beeing terrified, might bee reformed, which by
obliuion and facilitie [to euill] are brought to preuaricate. 


 

 
 And in the sixt Councell, Wee doe protest before God, and all the orders of
 Angels, in the presence of the Prophets and Apostles, and all the companie of Martyrs,
 and before all the Catholique Church, and assemblies of the Christians; That no man
 shall goe about to seeke the destruction of the King: No man shall touch the life of the
 Prince: No man shall depriue him of the Kingdome: No man by any tyrannical pre-
 sumption shall vsurpe to himselfe the Soueraigntie of the Kingdome: No man by any
 Machination shall in his aduersitie associate to himselfe any packe of Conspirators
 against him: And that if any of vs shall be presumptuous by rashnesse in any of these
 cases, let him be stricken with the anatheme of God, and reputed as condemned in
 eternall iudgement without any hope of recouery. 
 
 And in the tenth Councell (to omit diuers others held also at Toledo ) it is
 said: That if any religious man, euen from the Bishop to the lowest Order of the
 Church-men or Monkes, shall bee found to haue violated the generall Oathes made for
 the preseruation of the Kinges Person, or of the Nation and Countrey with a prophane
 minde; foorthwith let him bee depriued of all dignitie, and excludedfrom all place and
 Honour . The occasion of the Decrees made for this Oath, was, That the Chris-
 tians were suspected for want of fidelitie to their Kings; and did either equiuocate
 in taking their Oath, or make no conscience to keepe it, when they had giuen it;
 as may appeare by sundry speeches in the Councell, saying, There is a generall
 report, that there is that perfidiousnesse in the mindes of many people of diuers
 Nations, that they make no conscience to keepe the Oath and fidelitie that they haue
 sworne vnto their Kings: but doe dissemble a profession of fidelitie in their mouthes,
 when they hold an impious perfidiousnesse in their mindes . And againe, They
 sweare to their Kings, and yet doe they preuaricate in the fidelitie which they haue
 promised: Neither doe they feare the Volume of Gods iudgement, by the which the
 curse of God is brought vpon them, with great threatening of punishments, which doe
 sweare lyingly in the Name of God . To the like effect spake they in the Councill
 of Aquisgran: If any of the Bishops, or other Church-man of inferiour degree,
 hereafter thorow feare or couetousnesse, or any other perswasion, shall make defection
from our Lord the Orthodoxe Emperour Lodowicke, or shall violate the Oath of
fidelitie made vnto him, or shall with their peruerse intention adhere to his enemies;
let him by this Canonicall and Synodall sentence bee depriued of whatsoeuer place hee
is possessed of. 
 
 And now to come to a particular answere of his Letter. First, as concerning
 the sweet memory hee hath of his old acquaintance with the Arch-priest; it may
 indeed be pleasing for him to recount: but sure I am, his acquaintance with him
 and the rest of his societie, our Fugitiues (whereof he also vanteth himselfe in his
 Preface to the Reader in his Booke of Controuersies) hath prooued sowre to vs


 
and our State: For some of such Priests and Iesuits, as were the greatest Traitors
and fomenters of the greatest conspiracies against the late Queene, gaue vp
Father Rob: Bellarmine for one of their greatest authorities and oracles: And
therefore I do not enuy the great honour he can winne, by his vaunt of his inward
familiarity with an other Princes traitors & fugitiues; whom vnto if he teach
no better maners then hitherto he hath done, I thinke his fellowship are litle
beholding vnto him.
 
 And for desiring him to remember him in his prayers at the Altar of the Lord:
if the Arch-Priests prayers prooue no more profitable to his soule, then Bellar-
mines counsell is like to proue profitable, both to the soule and bodie of Blackwell 
(if he would follow it) the authour of this Letter might very well be without his
prayers.
 
 Now the first messenger that I can finde which brought ioyfull newes of the
Arch-Priest to Bellarmine , was hee that brought the newes of the Arch-Priests
taking, and first appearance of Martyrdome. A great signe surely of the Cardi-
nals mortification, that hee was so reioyced to heare of the apprehension, im-
prisonment and appearance of putting to death of so old and deare a friend of his.
But yet apparantly he should first haue beene sure, that hee was onely to bee
punished for cause of Religion, before hee had so triumphed vpon the expectation
of his Martyrdome. For first, by what rule of charitie was it lawfull for him to
iudge mee a persecutour, before proofe had beene made of it by the said Arch-
Priests condemnation and death ? What could hee know, that the said Arch-
Priest was not taken vpon suspicion of his guiltinesse in the Powder-Treason ?
What certaine information had hee then receiued vpon the particulars, whereupon
hee was to bee accused ? And last of all, by what inspiration could he foretell
whereupon hee was to bee accused ? For at that time there was yet nothing
layed to his charge. And if charitie should not bee suspicious, what warrant had
hee absolutely to condemne mee of vsing persecution and tyrannie, which could
not bee but implyed vpon mee, if Blackwel was to bee a Martyr ? But surely it
may iustly be sayd of Bellarmine in this case, that our Sauiour CHRIST saith of all
worldly and carnall men, who thinke it enough to loue their friends, and hate
their enemies; the limits of the Cardinals charitie extending no farther, then to
them of his owne profession. For what euer hee added in superfluous charitie to
 Blackwel , in reioycing in the speculation of his future Martyrdome; hee detracted
as much vniustly and vncharitably from me, in accounting of me thereby as of a
bloody Persecutour. And whereas this ioy of his was interrupted by the next
messenger, that brought the newes of the saide Arch-Priest his failing in his
constancie, by taking of this Oath; he needed neuer to haue beene troubled, either
with his former ioy or his second sorrow, both beeing alike falsly grounded. For
as it was neuer my intention to lay any thing vnto the said Arch-Priests charge,
as I haue neuer done to any for cause of conscience, so was Blackwels constancie

 
 neuer brangled by taking of this Oath; It beeing a thing which he euer thought
 lawfull before his apprehension, and whereunto hee perswaded all Catholiques to
 giue obedience; like as after his apprehension, hee neuer made doubt or stop in it;
 but at the first offering it vnto him, did freely take it, as a thing most lawfull;
 neither meanes of threatening, or flatterie being euer vsed vnto him, as himselfe
 can yet beare witnesse.
 
 And as for the temperature and modification of this Oath, except that a rea-
 sonable and lawfull matter is there set downe in reasonable and temperate wordes,
 agreeing thereunto; I know not what he can meane, by quarelling it for that fault:
 For no temperatenesse nor modifications in words therein, can iustly be called the
 Deuils craft; when the thing it selfe is so plaine, and so plainely interpreted to all
 them that take it; as the onely troublesome thing in it all, bee the wordes vsed
 in the end thereof, for eschewing AEquiuocation and Mentall reseruation . Which
 new Catholike doctrine, may farre iustlier bee called the Deuils craft, then any
 plaine and temperate wordes, in so plaine and cleare a matter. But what shall we
 say of these strange countrey clownes, whom of with the Satyre we may iustly
 complaine, that they blow both hote & cold out of one mouth ? For Luther and
 all our bold and free-speaking Writers are mightily railed vpon by them, as hote-
 brained fellowes, and speakers by the Deuils instinct: and now if we speake
 moderately and temperately of them, it must be tearmed the Deuils craft: And
 therefore wee may iustly complaine with Christ , that when we mourne, they
 wil not lament: and when we pipe, they wil not dance. But neither Iohn Baptist 
 his seueritie, nor Christ his meekenesse and lenitie can please them, who build
 but to their owne Monarchie vpon the ground of their owne Traditions; and not
 to Christ vpon the ground of his word and infallible trewth.
 
 But what can bee meant by alleadging, that the craft of the Deuill herein, is
onely vsed for subuersion of the Catholique Faith, and euersion of Saint Peters 
Primacie; had neede bee commented anew by Bellarmine himselfe: For in all this
Letter of his, neuer one word is vsed, to prooue that by any part of this Oath the
Primacie of Saint Peter is any way medled with, except Master Bellarmine his
bare alleadging; which without proouing it by more cleare demonstration, can
neuer satisfie the conscience of any reasonable man. For (for ought that I know)
heauen and earth are no farther asunder, then the profession of a temporall
obedience to a temporall King, is different from any thing belonging to the
Catholique Faith, or Supremacie of Saint Peter : For as for the Catholique Faith;
can there be one word found in all that Oath, tending or sounding to matter of
Religion ? Doeth he that taketh it, promise there to beleeue, or not to beleeue
any article of Religion ? Or doeth hee so much as name a trew or false Church
there ? And as for Saint Peters Primacie; I know no Apostles name that it therein
named, except the name of Iames , it being my Christen name: though it please
him not to deigne to name me in all the Letter; albeit, the contents thereof con-

 
cerne mee in the highest degree. Neither is there any mention at all made therein,
either disertis verbis , or by any other indirect meanes, either of the Hierarchie of
the Church, of Saint Peters succession, of the Sea Apostolike, or of any such mat-
ter: but that the Author of our Letter doeth brauely make mention of Saint
 Peters succession, bringing it in comparison with the succession of Henry the
eight. Of which vnapt and vnmannerly similitude, I wonder he should not be
much ashamed: For as to King Henries Successour (which hee meaneth by mee)
as I, I say, neuer did, nor will persume to create any Article of Faith, or to bee
Iudge thereof; but to submit my exemplarie obedience vnto them, in as great
humilitie as the meanest of the land: so if the Pope could bee as well able to
prooue his either Personall or Doctrinall Succession from Saint Peter , as I am able
to prooue my lineall descent from the Kings of England and Scotland ; there had
neuer beene so long adoe, nor so much sturre kept about this question in Christen-
dome; neither had Master Bellarmine himselfe needed to haue bestowed so
many sheetes of paper De summo Pontifice , in his great bookes of Controuersies:
And when all is done, to conclude with a morall certitude, and a pi credendum ; 
bringing in the Popes, that are parties in this cause, to be his witnesses: and
yet their historicall narration must bee no article of Faith. And I am without
vanterie sure, that I doe farre more neerely imitate the worthie actions of my
Predecessours, then the Popes in our aage can be well proued to be similes Petro , 
especially in cursing of Kings, and setting free their Subiects from their Allegiance
vnto them.
 
 But now wee come to his strongest argument, which is, That he would alledge
 vpon mee a Panicke terrour, as if I were possessed with a needlesse feare: For, 
 saith the Cardinall, from the beginning of the Churches first infancie, euen to this
 day, where was it euer heard, that euer a Pope either commaunded to bee killed, or
 allowed the slaughter of any Prince whatsoeuer, whether hee were an Hereticke, an
 Ethnicke, or Persecutour ? But first, wherefore doeth he here wilfully, and of
 purpose omit the rest of the points mentioned in that Oath, for deposing, degrad-
 ing, stirring vp of armes, or rebelling against them, which are as well mentioned
 in that Oath, as the killing of them ? as beeing all of one consequence against a
 King, no Subiect beeing so scrupulous, as that hee will attempt the one, and leaue
 the other vnperformed if hee can. And yet surely I cannot blame him for passing
 it ouer, since he could not otherwise haue eschewed the direct belying of himselfe
 in tearmes, which hee now doeth but in substance and effect: For as for the
 Popes deposing and degrading of Kings, hee maketh so braue vaunts and bragges
 of it in his former bookes, as he could neuer with, ciuill honestie haue denied it here. 
 
 But to returne to the Popes allowing of killing of Kinges, I know not with
what face hee can set so stout a deniall vpon it against his owne knowledge. How
many Emperours did the Pope raise warre against in their owne bowels ? Who


 
 as they were ouercome in battaile, were subiect to haue beene killed therein,
 which I hope the Pope could not but haue allowed, when he was so farre inraged
 at Henry the fifth for gluing buriall to his fathers dead corpes, after the Pope 
 had stirred him vp to rebell against his father, and procured his ruine. But
 leauing these olde Histories to Bellarmines owne bookes, that doe most authen-
 tically cite them, as I haue already said, let vs turne our eyes vpon our owne time,
 and therein remember what a Panegyricke Oration was made by the Pope , in
 praise and approbation of the Frier and his fact, that murthered king Henry the
 third of France , who was so farre from either being Hereticke, Ethnicke, or Per-
 secutor in their account, that the said Popes owne wordes in that Oration are,
 That a trew Friar hath killed a counterfeit Frier . And besides that vehement
 Oration and congratulation for that fact, how neere it scaped, that the said Frier
 was not canonized for that glorious act, is better knowen to Bellarmine and his
 followers, then to vs here.
 
 But sure I am, if some Cardinals had not beene more wise and circumspect in
that errand, then the Pope himselfe was, the Popes owne Kalender of his Saints
would haue sufficiently proued Bellarmin a lier in this case. And to draw yet
neerer vnto our selues; how many practises and attempts were made against the
late Queenes life, which were directly enioyned to those Traitours by their Con-
fessors, and plainly authorized by the Popes allowance ? For verification whereof,
there needs no more proofe, then that neuer Pope either then or since, called any
Church-man in question for medling in any those treasonable conspiracies; nay,
the Cardinals owne S. Sanderus mentioned in his Letter, could well verifie this
trewth if, hee were aliue; and who will looke his bookes, will find them filled with
no other doctrine then this. And what difference there is betweene the killing,
or allowing the slaughter of Kings, and the stirring vp and approbation of prac-
tises to kill them; I remit to Bellarmines owne iudgement. It may then very
clearely appeare, how strangely this Authors passion hath made him forget him-
selfe, by implicating himselfe in so strong a contradiction against his owne knowl-
edge and conscience, against the witnesse of his former bookes, and against the
practise of our owne times. But who can wonder at this contradiction of himselfe
in this point, when his owne great Volumes are so filled with contradictions ?
which when either he, or any other shall euer bee able to reconcile, I will then
beleeue that hee may easily reconcile this impudent strong deniall of his in his
Letter, of any Popes medling against Kings, with his owne former bookes, as I
haue already said.
 
 And that I may not seeme to imitate him in affirming boldly that which I no
wayes prooue; I will therefore send the Reader to looke for witnesses of his con-
tradictions, in such places here mentioned in his owne booke. In his bookes of
Iustification, 4 there he affirmeth, That for the vncertaintie of our owne proper 

 

 righteousness, and for auoiding of vaine-glory, it is most sure and safe, to repose our
whole confidence in the alone mercy and goodnesse of God ; Which proposition of
his, is directly contrary to the discourse, and current of all his flue bookes de
Iustificatione, wherein the same is contained. 
 God doeth not encline a man to euill, either naturally or morally. 
 Presently after, hee affirmeth the contrary, That God doeth not encline to euill
 naturally, but morally. 
 All the Fathers teach constantly, That Bishops doe succeed the Apostles, and
 Priests the seuentie disciples. 
 Elsewhere he affirmeth the contrary, That Bishops doe not properly succeede
 the Apostles. 
 That Iudas did not beleeue. 
 Contrary, That Iudas was iust and certainly good. 
 The keeping of the Law according to the substance of the worke, doeth require
 that the Commandement be so kept, that sinne be not committed, and the man be not
 guiltie for hauing not kept the Commandement. 
 Contrary, It is to be knowen that it is not all one, to doe a good morall worke,
 and to keepe the Commandement according to the substance of the worke: For the
 Commandement may be kept according to the substance of the worke, euen with sinne;
 as if one should restore to his friend the thing committed to him of trust, to the end
 that theeues might afterward take it from him. 
 Peter did not loose that faith, whereby the heart beleeueth vnto iustification. 
 Contrary, Peters sinne was deadly. 
 Antichrist shall be a Magician, and after the maner of other Magicians shall se-
cretly worship the diuel. 
 Contrary, He shall not admit of idolatrie: he shall hate idoles, and reedifie the
 Temple. 
 By the wordes of Consecration the trew and solemne oblation is made. 
 Contrary, The sacrifice doeth not consist in the words: but in the oblation of the
thing it selfe. 
 That the end of the world cannot be knowne. 
 Contrary, After the death of Antichrist, there shall bee but fiue and fourtie dayes
till the end of the world. 
 
 That the tenne Kings shall burne the scarlet Whore, that is , Rome. 

 

 
 Contrary, Antichrist shall hate Rome, and fight against it, and burne it. 
 
 The name of vniuersall Bishop may be understood two wayes; one way, that he
which is said to be vniuersall Bishop, may bee thought to be the onely Bishop of all
Christian Cities; so that all others are not indeed Bishops, but onely Vicars to him,
who is called vniuersall Bishop: in which sense, the Pope is not vniuersall Bishop. 
 
 Contrary, All ordinary iurisdiction of Bishops doeth descend immediatly from
the Pope; and is in him, and from him is deriued to others . Which few places I
haue onely selected amongst many the like, that the discreet and iudicious
Reader may discerne ex vngue Leonem : For when euer he is pressed with a
weighty obiection, hee neuer careth, nor remembreth how his solution and
answere to that, may make him gainesay his owne doctrine in some other places,
so it serue him for a shift to put off the present storme withall.
 
 But now to returne to our matter againe: Since Popes , sayeth hee, haue neuer.
at any time medled against Kings, wherefore, I pray you, should onely the King of 
 England be afraid of that, whereof neuer Christian King is, or was afraid ? Was
neuer Christian Emperour or King afraid of the Popes ? How then were these
miserable Emperours tost and turmoiled, and in the end vtterly ruined by the
 Popes : for proofe whereof I haue already cited Bellarmines owne bookes ? Was
not the Emperour afraid, who waited barefooted in the frost and snow three
dayes at the Popes gate, before he could get entrie? Was not the Emperour 
also afraid, who was driuen to lie agroofe on his belly, and suffer another Pope to
tread vpon his neck ? And was not another Emperour afraid, who was con-
strained in like maner to endure a third Pope to beat off from his head the Im-
periall Crowne with his foot ? Was not Philip afraid, being made Emperour
against Pope Innocentius the thirds good liking, when he brake out into these
words, Either the Pope shall take the Crowne from Philip, or Philip shall take the
Miter from the Pope ? whereupon the Pope stirred vp Ottho against him, who
caused him to be slaine; and presently went to Rome , and was crowned Em-
perour by the Pope , though afterward the Pope deposed him too. Was not the
Emperour Fredericke afraid, when Innocentius the fourth excommunicated him,
depriued him of his crowne, absolued Princes of their Oath of fidelitie to him, and
in Apulia corrupted one to giue him poison ? whereof the Emperour recouering,
hee hired his bastard sonne Manfredus to poison him; whereof he died. What
did Alexander the third write to the Soldan ? That if he would liue quietly, hee
should by some slight murther the Emperour; and to that end sent him the Em-

 

perours picture. And did not Alexander the sixt take of the Turke Baiazetes 
two hundred thousand crownes to kill his brother Gemen ; or as some call him,
 Sisimus , whom he helde captiue at Rome ? Did hee not accept of the conditions
to poyson the man, and had his pay ? Was not our Henry the second afraid
after the slaughter of Thomas Becket ; that besides his going bare-footed in
Pilgrimage, was whipped vp and down the Chapter-house like a schoole-boy, and
glad to escape so to ? Had not this French King his great grandfather King Iohn 
reason to be afraid, when the Pope gaue away his kingdome of Nauarre to the
King of Spaine , whereof he yet possesseth the best halfe ? Had not this King,
his Successour reason to be afraid, when he was forced to begge so submissiuely
the relaxation of his Excommunication, as he was content likewise to suffer his
Ambassadour to be whipped at Rome for penance ? And had not the late Queene
reason to looke to her selfe, when she was excommunicated by Pius Quintus , her
Subiects loosed from their fidelitie and Allegiance toward her, her Kingdome of
 Ireland giuen to the King of Spaine , and that famous fugitiue diuine, honoured
with the like degree of a redde Hat as Bellarmine is, was not ashamed to publish
in Print an Apologie for Stanleys treason, maintaining, that by reason of her
excommunication and heresie, it was not onely lawfull for any of of her Subiects,
but euen they were bound in conscience to depriue her of any strength, which lay
in their power to doe ? And whether it were armies, townes, or fortresses of hers
which they had in their hands, they were obliged to put them in the King of
 Spaine her enemies hands, shee no more being the right owner of anything ? But
albeit it be trew, that wise men are mooued by the examples of others dangers to
vse prouidence and caution, according to the olde Prouerbe, Tum tua res agitur ,
paries cum proximus ardet : yet was I much neerlier summoned to vse this caution,
by the practise of it in mine owne person.
 
 First, by the sending foorth of these Bulles whereof I made mention already,
 for debarring me from entrie vnto this Crowne, and Kingdome. And next after
 my entrie, and full possession thereof, by the horrible Powder-treason, which
 should haue bereft both me and mine, both of crowne and life. And howsoeuer
 the Pope will seeme to cleare himselfe of any allowance of the said Powder-trea-
 son; yet can it not be denied, that his principall ministers here, and his chiefe
 Mancipia the Iesuites, were the plaine practisers thereof: for which the principall
of them hath died confessing it, and other haue fled the Countrey for the crime;
yea, some of them gone into Italy : and yet neither these that fled out of this
Countrey for it, nor yet Baldwine , who though he then remained in the Low-
countreys, was of counsell in it, were euer called to account for it by the Pope;
much lesse punished for medling in so' scandalous and enormous businesse. And


 

 now what needs so great wonder and exclamation, that the onely King of England
 feareth : And what other Christian King doeth, or euer did feare but hee ? As if
by the force of his rhetoricke he could make me and my good Subiects to mistrust
our senses, deny the Sunne to shine at midday, and not with the serpent to stop
our eares to his charming, but to the plaine and visible veritie it selfe. And yet
for all this wonder, he can neuer prooue mee to be troubled with such a Panicke
terrour. Haue I euer importuned the Pope with any request for my securitie ?
Or haue I either troubled other Christian Princes my friends and allies, to intreat
for me at the Popes hand ? Or yet haue I begged from them any aide or assist-
ance for my farther securitie ? No. All this wondred-at feare of mine, stretcheth
no further, then wisely to make distinction betweene the sheepe and goats in my
owne pasture. For since, what euer the Popes part hath beene in the Powder-
treason; yet certaine it is, that all these caitife monsters did to their death main-
taine, that onely zeale of Religion mooued them to that horrible attempt: yea,
some of them at their death, would not craue pardon at God or King for their
offence; exhorting other of their followers to the like constancie. Had not wee
then, and our Parliament great reason, by this Oath to set a marke of distinction
betweene good Subiects, and bad ? Yea, betweene Papists, though peraduenture
zealous in their religion, yet otherwise ciuilly honest and good Subiects, and such
terrible firebrands of hell, as would maintaine the like maximes, which these
Powder-men did ? Nay, could there be a more gracious part in a King, suppose I
say it, towards Subiects of a contrary Religion, then by making them to take this
Oath, to publish their honest fidelitie in temporal things to me their Soueraigne,
and thereby to wipe off that imputation and great slander which was laide
vpon the whole professours of that Religion, by the furious enterprise of these
Powder-men ?
 
 And whereas for illustration of this strong argument of his, hee hath brought
 in for a similitude the historie of Iulian the Apostata his dealing with the Chris-
 tians, when as he straited them either to commit idolatrie, or to come within the
 compasse of treason: I would wish the authour to remember, that although a
 similitude may be permitted claudicare vno pede ; yet this was a very ill chosen
 similitude, which is lame both of feete and hands, and euery member of the body:
 For I shall in fewe wordes prooue, that it agreeth in no one point saue one, with
 our purpose, which is, that Iulian was an Emperour, and I a King. First, Iulian 
 was an Apostata , one that had renounced the whole Christian faith, which he had
 once professed, and became an Ethnike againe, or rather an Atheist: whereas I
 am a Christian, who neuer changed that Religion, that I dranke in with my
 milke: nor euer, I thanke GOD, was ashamed of my profession. Iulian dealt
 against Christians onely for the profession of Christes cause: I deale in this
 cause with my Subiects, onely to make a distinction betweene trew Subiects, an
 false-hearted traitours. Iulians end was the ouerthrow of the Christians: my

 
onely end is, to maintaine Christianitie in a peaceable gouernement. Iulians 
drift was to make them commit Idolatrie: my purpose is, to cause my Subiects
to make open profession of their naturall Allegiance, and ciuill Obedience. Iulians 
meanes whereby he went about it, was by craft, and insnaring them before they
were aware: my course in this is plaine, cleare, and voyd of all obscuritie; neuer
refusing leaue to any that are required to take this Oath, to study it at leisure, and
giuing them all the interpretation of it they can craue. But the greatest dissimili-
tude of all, is in this: that Iulian pressed them to commit idolatrie to Idoles and
Images: but as well I, as all the Subiects of my profession are so farre from guilt
in this point, as wee are counted heretiques by you, because we will not commit
idolatrie. So as in the maine point of all, is the greatest contrarietie. For, Iulian 
persecuted the Christians because they would not commit idolatrie; and ye count
me a persecutour, because I will not admit idolatrie. So as to conclude this point,
this old sentence may well be applied to Bellarmine , in vsing so vnapt a similitude,
 Perdere quos vult Iupiter, hos dementat. 
 
 And therefore his vncharitable conclusion doeth not rightly follow: That it
seemeth vnto him, that some such thing should be subtilly or fraudulently included in
this Oath ; as if no man can detest Treason against the King, or professe ciuill
subiection, except hee renounce the Primacie of the Apostolique Sea. But how
he hath suckt this apprehension out at his fingers ends, I cannot imagine: for
sure I am, as I haue oft said, hee neuer goeth about to prooue it: and to answere
an improbable imagination, is to fight against a vanishing shadow. It cannot be
denied indeed, that many seruants of CHRIST, as well Priests, as others, haue
endured constantly all sorts of torments, and death, for the profession of CHRIST:
and therefore to all such his examples, as hee bringeth in for verifying the same, I
need not to giue him any other answere, saue onely to remember him, that he
playeth the part of a sophister in all these his examples of the constancie of
Martyrs; euer taking Controuersum pro confesso , as if this our case were of the
same nature.
 
 But yet that the Reader may the better discouer, not onely how vnaptly his
similitudes are applied, but likewise how dishonestly hee vseth himselfe in all his
citations: I haue thought good to set downe the very places themselues cited by
him, together with a short deduction of the trew state of those particular cases:
whereby, how little these examples can touch our case; nay, by the contrary,
how rightly their trew sense may bee vsed, as our owne weapons to be throwen
backe vpon him that alledgeth them, shall easily appeare. And first, for Eleazar : 
If the Arch-priest his ground of refusing the Oath, were as good as Eleazars was,
to forbeare to eate the swines flesh, it might not vnfitly be applied by the Cardinal
to this purpose: For as Eleazar was a principall Scribe, so is he a principall Priest:
As Eleazars example had a great force in it, to animate the yonger Scribes to


 

keepe the Lawe, or in his colourable eating it, to haue taught them to dissemble:
so hath the Arch-priests, either to make the inferiour Priests to take the Oath,
or to refuse it: but the ground failing, the building cannot stand: For what
example is there in all the Scripture, in which disobedience to the Oath of the
King, or want of Allegiance is allowed ? If the Cardinall would remember, that
when the Church maketh a Lawe (suppose to forbid flesh on certaine dayes) he
that refuseth to obey it, incurreth the iust censure of the Church: If a man then
ought to die rather than to breake the least of Gods Ceremoniall Lawes, and to
pine and starue his body, rather then to violate the Church his positiue Law: will
he not giue leaue to a man to redeeme his soule from sinne, and to keepe his body
from punishment, by keeping a Kings politike Law, and by giuing good example
in his Person, raise vp a good opinion in me of like Allegiance in the inferiour of
his order ? This application, as I take it, would haue better fitted this example.
 
 But let mee remember the Cardinall of another Oath inioyned by a King to
his people, whereby he indangered his owne life, and hazarded the safetie of the
whole armie, when hee made the people sweare in the morning, not to taste of any
meate vntill night: which Oath he exacted so strictly, that his eldest sonne, and
heire apparant, Ionathan , for breaking of it, by tasting a little hony of the top of
his rodde, though he heard not when the King gaue that Oath, had well-nigh
died for it. And shall an Oath giuen vpon so vrgent an occasion as this was, for
the apparant safetie of me and my posteritie, forbidding my people to drinke so
deeply in the bitter cup of Antichristian fornications, but that they may keepe so
much hony in their hearts, as may argue them still espoused to me their Sou-
eraigne in the maine knot of trew Allegiance; shall this Law, I say, by him bee
condemned to hell for a stratageme of Sathan ? I say no more, but Gods lot in the
Oath of Sauls , and Bellarmines verdict vpon this Oath of ours, seeme not to be
cast out of one lap.
 
 Now to this example of Basill , which is (as he sayth) so fit for his purpose:
First, I must obserue, that if the Cardinall would leaue a common and ordinarie
tricke of his in all his Citations, which is to take what makes for him, and leaue
out what makes against him; and cite the Authours sense, as well as his Sen-
tence, we should not be so much troubled with answering the Ancients which he
alledgeth. To instance it in this very place: if he had continued his allegation
one line further, hee should haue found this place out of Theodoret , of more force
to haue mooued Blackwell to take the Oath, then to haue disswaded him from it:
For in the very next words it followeth, Imperatoris quidem amicitiam magni se
pendere, cum pietate; qu remot, perniciosam esse dicere . But that it may
appeare, whether of vs haue greatest right to this place, I will in few words shew
the Authours drift.
 
 The Emperour Valens being an Arrian, at the perswasion of his wife, when he
had depriued all the Churches of their Pastours, came to Caesarea , where S. Basil 

 

was then Bishop, who, as the historie reporteth, was accounted the Light of the
world . Before hee came, hee sent his deputie to worke it, that S. Basil should
hold fellowship with Eudoxius (which Eudoxius 2 was bishop of Constantinople, 
and the principall of the Arrian faction) or if he would not, that hee should put
him to banishment. Now when the Emperours Deputie came to Caesarea , he
sent for Basil , intreated him honourably, spake pleasingly vnto him, desired he
would giue way to the time, neither that he would hazard the good of so many
Churches tenui exquisitione dogmatis : promised him the Emperours fauour, and
himselfe to be mediatour for his good. But S. Basill answered, These intising
speeches were to fit to bee vsed to children, that vse to gape after such things: but for
them that were throughly instructed in Gods word, they could neuer suffer any syl-
lable thereof to be corrupted: Nay, if need required, they would for the maintenance
thereof refuse no kind of death. Indeed the loue of the Emperour ought to bee greatly
esteemed with pietie; but pietie taken away, it was pernicious. 
 
 This is the trewth of the historie. Now compare the case of Basill with the
 Arch-priests: Basill was sollicited to become an Arrian: the Arch-priest not once
 touched for any article of faith. Basill would haue obeyed the Emperour, but
 that the word of GOD forbade him: this man is willed to obey, because the word
 of GOD commandeth him. Basill highly esteemed the Emperours fauour, if it
 might haue stood with pietie: the Archi-priest is exhorted to reiect it, though it
 stand with trew godlinesse in deed, to embrace it. But that he may lay load
 vpon the Arch-priest, it is not sufficient to exhort him to courage and constancie
 by Eleazarus and Basils examples; but he must be vtterly cast downe with the
 comparing his fall to S. Peter , and Marcellinus : which two mens cases were the
 most fearefull, considering their persons and places, that are to be found, or read
 of, either in all the bookes of diuine Scripture, or the volumes of Ecclesiasticall
 histories; the one denying the onely trew GOD, the other our Lord and Sauiour
 IESVS CHRIST; the one sacrificing to Idoles, with the prophane heathen: the
 other forswearing his Lord and Master, with the hard-hearted Iewes. Vnlesse the
 Cardinall would driue the Arch-priest to some horrour of conscience, and pit of
 despaire, I know not what he can meane by this comparison: For sure I am, all
 that are not intoxicated with their cup, cannot but wonder to heare of an Oath of
 Allegiance to a naturall Soueraigne, to be likened to an Apostats denying of God,
 and forswearing of his Sauiour.
 
 But to let passe the Disdiapason of the cases (as his ill-fauoured coupling
 S. Peter the head of their Church, with an apostate Pope) I marueile hee would
remember this example of Marcellinus , since his brother Cardinall Baronius , and
the late Edition of the Councels by Binnius seeme to call the credit of the whole
historie into question, saying, That it might plainely be refuted, and that it is prob-
 

 

 ably to be shewed, that the story is but obreptious , but that he would not swarue from
 the common receiued opinion.
 
 And if a man might haue leaue to coniecture; so would his Cardinalship too,
 if it were not for one or two sentences in that Councell of Sinuessa , which serued
 for his purpose; namely, that Prima sedes  nemine iudicatur : And,
 Iudica causam tuam: nostr sententi non condemnaberis . But to what purpose a great
 Councell (as he termes it) of three hundred Bishops and others, should meete
 together, who before they met, knew they could doe nothing: when they were
 there, did nothing, but like Cuckowes, sing ouer and ouer the same song: that,
 Prima sedes  nemine iudicatur ; and so after three dayes sitting (a long time in-
 deed for a great and graue Councell) brake so bluntly vp: and yet, that there
 should be seuentie two witnesses brought against him, and that they should
 subscribe his excommunication, and that at his owne mouth hee tooke the
 Anathema maranatha : how these vntoward contradictions shall be made to agree,
 I must send the Cardinall to Venice , to Padre Paulo , who in his Apologie against
 the Cardinals oppositions, hath handled them very learnedly.
 
 But from one Pope, let vs passe to another: (for, what a principall article of
 Faith and Religion this Oath is, I haue alreadie sufficiently proued.) Why hee
 called S. Gregory our Apostle, I know not, vnlesse perhaps it be, for that hee
 sent Augustine the Monke and other with him into England, to conuert vs to
 the faith of Christ, wherein I with the Popes his successours would follow his
 patterne: For albeit hee sent them by diuine reuelation (as hee said) into England
 vnto King Ethelbert ; yet when they came, they exercised no part of their func-
 tion, but by the Kings leaue and permission. So did King Lucius send to
 Eleutherius his predecessour, and hee sent him diuers Bishops, who were all
 placed by the Kings authoritie. These conuerted men to the faith, and taught
 them to obey the King. And if the Popes in these dayes would but insist in these
 steppes of their fore-fathers; then would they not entertaine Princes fugitiues
 abroad, nor send them home, not onely without my leaue, but directly against the
 Lawes, with plots of treason and doctrine of rebellion, to draw Subiects from their
 obedience to me their naturall King: nor be so cruell to their owne Mancipia , as
 returning them with these wares, put either a State in iealousie of them; or them
 in hazard of their owne liues. Now to our Apostle (since the Cardinall will haue
 him so called) I perswade my selfe I should doe a good seruice to the Church in
 this my labour, if I could but reape this one fruit of it, to moue the Cardinall to
 deale faithfully with the Fathers, & neuer to alledge their opinions against their
 own purpose: For, this letter of Gregorius was written to Iohn Bishop of Palermo 
in Sicily , to whom he granted vsum pallij , to be worne in such times, and in such

 

 order as the Priests in the Ile of Sicily , and his predecessors were wont to vse: and
 withall giueth him a caueat, That the reuerence to the Apostolike Sea, be not dis-
 turbed by the presumption of any: for then the state of the members doeth remaine
 sound, when the head of the Faith is not bruised by any iniury, and the authoritie of
 the Canons alwayes remaine safe and sound. 
 
 Now let vs examine the words. The Epistle was written to a Bishop, especially
 to grant him the vse of the Pall; a ceremonie and matter indifferent. As it
 appeareth, the Bishop of Rome tooke it well at his hands, that he would not per-
 sume to take it vpon him without leaue from the Apostolike Sea, giuing him that
 admonition which followeth in the wordes alledged out of him: which doctrine
 we are so farre from impugning, that we altogether approoue and allow of the
 same, that whatsoeuer ceremony for order is thought meet by the Christian
 Magistrate, and the Church, the same ought inuiolably be to kept: and where
 the head and gouernour in matters of that nature are not obeyed, the members of
 that Church must needs run to hellish confusion: But that Gregory by that terme,
 caputfidei , held himselfe the head of our faith, and the head of all religion, cannot
 stand with the course of his doctrine and writings: For first, when an other
 would haue had this stile to be called Vniuersalis Episcopus , hee said, I doe
 confidently auouch, that whosoeuer called himselfe, or desireth to be called Vniuersall
 Bishop, in this aduancing of himselfe, is the fore-runner of the Antichrist : which
 notwithstanding was a stile farre inferiour to that of Caput fidei . And when it
 was offered to himselfe the wordes of S. Gregory be these, refusing that Title:
 None of my predecessours [Bishops of Rome,] euer consented to vse this prophane
 name [of vniuerfall Bishop.] None of my predecessours euer tooke vpon him this
 name of singulartie, neither consented to vse it, Wee the Bishops of Rome doe not
 seeke, nor yet accept this glorious title, being offered vnto vs . And now, I pray you,
 would he that refused to be called Vniuersall Bishop, be stiled Caput fidei , vnlesse
 it were in that sense, as I haue expressed ? which sense if he will not admit, giue
 me leaue to say that of Gregorie , which himselfe sayeth of Lyra, Minus caut
 locutus est : or which he elsewhere sayth of Chrysostome, Locutus est per excessum . 
 To redeeme therefore our Apostle out of his hands, and to let him remaine ours,
 and not his in this case; it is very trew that he sayth in that sense he spake it.
 When yee goe about to disturbe, diminish, or take away the authoritie or suprem-
 acie of the Church, which resteth on the head of the King, within his dominions,
ye cut off the head and chiefe gouernour thereof, and disturbe the state and mem-
bers of the whole body. And for a conclusion of this point, I pray him to think,
that we are so well perswaded of the good minde of our Apostle S. Gregory to vs,
that wee desire no other thing to be suggested to the Pope and his Cardinals, then
our Apostle S. Gregory desired Sabinian to suggest vnto the Emperour and the

 

State in his time. His words be these: One thing there is, of which I would haue
you shortly to suggest to your most noble Lord and Master: That if I his seruant
would haue had my hand in slaying of the Lombards, at this day the Nation of the
Lombards had neither had King, nor Dukes, nor Earles, and had beene diuided
asunder in vtter confusion: but because I feare God, I dread to haue my hand in the
blood of any man. 
 
 And thus hauing answered to S. Gregory , I come to another Pope, his Apostle,
 S. Leo . And that hee may see, I haue not in the former citations, quarelled him
like a Sophister for contention sake, but for finding out of the trewth, I doe grant,
that the authorities out of Leo, are rightly alledged all three, the wordes trewly
set downe, together with his trew intent and purpose: but withall, let me tell
him, and I appeale vnto his owne conscience, whether I speake not trewly, that
what Tullie said to Hortensius , when he did immoderately praise eloquence, that
hee would haue lift her vp to Heauen, that himselfe might haue gone vp with her;
So his S. Leo lift vp S. Peter with praises to the skie, that he being his heire, might
haue gone vp with him: For his S. Leo was a great Oratour, who by the power
of his eloquence redeemed Rome from fire, when both Attilas and Gensericus 
would haue burnt it. 
 
 Some fruites of this rhetoricke hee bestowed vpon S. Peter , saying, The Lord 
 did take Peter into the fellowship of the indiuisible vnitie : which wordes being
 coupled to the sentence alledged by the Cardinall (that he hath no part in the
 diuine Mysterie, that dare depart from the soliditie of Peter ) should haue giuen him,
 I thinke, such a skarre, as hee should neuer haue dared to haue taken any ad-
 uantage by the wordes immediatly preceding, for the benefite of the Church of
 Rome , and the head thereof; since those which immediatly follow, are so much
 derogatorie to the diuine Maiestie. And againe, My writings be strengthened by
 the authoritie and merit of my Lord, most blessed S. Peter. We beseech you to keepe
 the things decreed by vs through the inspiration of God, and the Apostle most blessed 
 S. Peter. If anything be well done, or decreed by vs; If anything be obtained of Gods
 mercy by daily prayers, it is to be ascribed to S. Peters workes and merits, whose
 power doeth liue, and authoritie excell in his owne Sea. Hee was so plentifully 
 watered of the very fountaine of all graces, that whereas he receiued many things alone,
 yet nothing passeth ouer to any other, but hee was partaker of it . And in a word, hee
 was so desirous to extoll Saint Peter, that a messenger from him was an embas-
 sage from Saint Peter: any thing done in his presence, was in S. Peters presence. 
 Neither did he vse all this Rhetoricke without purpose: for at that time the
 Patriarch of Constantinople contended with him for Primacie. And in the Coun-

 

 cell of Chalcedon, the Bishops, sixe hundred and more, gaue equall authoritie to
 the Patriarch of that Sea, and would not admit any Priuiledge to the Sea of
 Rome aboue him; but went against him. And yet he that gaue so much to Peter, 
 tooke nothing from Caesar ; but gaue him both his Titles and due, giuing the
 power of calling a Councell to the Emperour; as it may appeare by these one or
 two places following of many. If it may please your godlinesse to vouchsafe at our
 supplication to condiscend, that you will command a Councell of Bishops to be holden
 within Italy . And writing vnto the Bishop of Constantinople: Because the most
 clement Emperour, carefull of the peace of the Church, will haue a Councell to be
 holden; albeit it euidently appeare, the matter to be handled doeth in no case stand in
 neede of a Councell . And againe, Albeit my occasions will not permit me to be
 present vpon the day of the Councell of Bishops, which your godlinesse hath appointed. 
 So as by this it may well appeare, that hee that gaue so much to Peter , gaue also
 to Caesar his due and prerogatiue. But yet he playeth not faire play in this, that
 euen in all these his wrong applied arguments and examples, hee produceth no
 other witnesses, but the parties themselues; bringing euer the Popes sentences for
 approbation of their owne authoritie.
 
 Now indeed for one word of his in the middest of his examples, I cannot but
 greatly commend him; that is, that Martyrs ought to endure all sorts of tortures
 and death, before they suffer one syllable to be corrupted of the Law of God.
 Which lesson, if hee and all the rest of his owne profession would apply to them-
 selues, then would not the Sacrament be administred sub vn specie , directly con-
 trary to Christs institution, the practise of the Apostles and of the whole Primitive
 Church for many hundred yeeres: then would not the priuate Masses be in place
 of the Lordes Supper: then would not the words of the Canon of the Masse be
 opposed to the words of S. Paul and S. Luke , as our Aduersarie himselfe con-
 fesseth, and cannot reconcile them: nor then would not so many hundredths other
 traditions of men be set vp in their Church, not onely as equall, but euen preferred
 to the word of God. But sure in this point I feare I haue mistaken him: for I
 thinke hee doeth not meane by his Diuina Dogmata , the word of the God of
 heauen, but onely the Canons and Lawes of his Dominus Deus Papa : otherwise
all his Primacie of the Apostolike Sea would not be so much sticken vpon, hauing
so slender ground in the word of God.
 
 And for the great feare he hath, that the suddennes of the apprehension, the
bitternesse of the persecution, the weaknesse of his aage, and other such in-
firmities might haue been the cause of the Arch-priests fall; in this, I haue
already sufficiently answered him; hauing declared, as the trewth is, and as the
said Blackwell himselfe will yet testifie, that he tooke this Oath freely of himselfe,
without any inducement thereunto, either Precibus or Minis . 

 
 
 But amongst all his citations, hee must not forget holy Sanderus and his
 visibilis Monarchia , whose person and actions I did alreadie a little touch. And
 surely who will with vnpartiall eyes reade his bookes, they may well thinke, that
 hee hath deserued well of his English Romane-Church; but they can neuer
 thinke, but that hee deserued very ill of his English Soueraigne and State: Wit-
 nesse his owne books; whereout I haue made choice to set downe heere these
 fewe sentences following, as flowers pickt out of so worthy a garland. Elizabeth 
 Queene of ENGLAND, doeth exercise the Priestly acte of teaching and preaching the
 Gospel in ENGLAND, with no lesse authority than Christ himselfe, or Moses euer did.
 The supremacie of a woman in Churchmatters is from no other, then from the Deuil. 
 And of all things in generall thus he speaketh, The King that will not inthrall
 himselfe to the Popes authoritie, he ought not to be tolerated; but his Subiects ought to
 giue all diligence, that another may be chosen in his place assoone as may be. A King
 that is an Heretike, ought to be remooued from the Kingdome that hee holdeth ouer
 Christians; and the Bishops ought to endeauour to set vp another, assoone as possibly
 they can. Wee doe constantly affirme, that all Christian Kings are so farre vnder
 Bishops and Priests in all matters appertaining to faith, that if they shall continue in a
 fault against Christian Religion, after one or two admonitions, obstinately, for that
 cause they may and ought to be deposed by the Bishops from their temporall au-
 thoritie they holde ouer Christians. Bishops are set ouer temporall kingdomes, if
 those kingdomes doe submit themselues to the faith of Christ. We doe iustly affirme, 
 that all Secular power, whether Regall, or any other, is of men. The anoynting 
 which is powred vpon the head of the King by the Priests, doeth declare that hee is in-
feriour to the Priest. It is altogether against the will of Christ, that Christian kings
should haue supremacie in the Church. 
 
 And whereas for the crowne and conclusion of all his examples, he reckoneth
 his two English Martyrs, Moore and Roffensis , who died for that one most
 weightie head of doctrine, as he alledgeth, refusing the Oath of Supremacie; I
 must tell him, that he hath not been well informed in some materiall points, which
 doe very neerely concerne his two said Martyrs: For it is cleare and apparantly
 to be prooued by diuers Records, that they were both of them committed to the
 Tower about a yeere before either of them was called in question vpon their liues,
 for the Popes Supremacie; And that partly for their backwardnesse in the point
 of the establishment of the Kings succession, whereunto the whole Realme had
 subscribed, and partly for that one of them, to wit, Fisher , had had his hand in the
 matter of the holy maide of Kent; hee being for his concealement of that false
 prophets abuse, found guiltie of misprision of Treason. And as these were the
 principall causes of their imprisonment (the King resting secure of his Suprem-

 

 acie, as the Realme stood then affected, but especially troubled for setling the
 Crowne vpon the issue of his second mariage) so was it easily to be conceiued, that
 being thereupon discontented, their humours were thereby made apt to draw
 them by degrees, to further opposition against the King and his authoritie, as
 indeede it fell out: For in the time of their being in prison, the Kings lawfull
 authoritie in cases Ecclesiasticall being published and promulged, as well by a
 generall decree of the Clergie in their Synode, as by an Acte of Parliament made
 thereupon; they behaued themselues so peeuishly therein, as the olde coales of
 the Kings anger being thereby raked vp of new, they were againe brought in
 question; as well for this one most weighty head of doctrine of the Pope his
 supremacy, as for the matter of the Kings mariage and succession, as by the con-
 fession of one of themselues, euen Thomas Moore , is euident: For being con-
 demned, he vsed these words at the barre before the Lords, Non ignoro cur me
 morti adiudicaueritis; videlicet ob id, qud nunquam voluerim assentiri in negotio
 matrimonii Regis. That is, I am not ignorant why you haue adiudged mee to death:
 to wit, for that I would neuer consent in the business of the new mariage of the King. 
 By which his owne confession it is plaine, that this great martyr himselfe tooke
 the cause of his owne death, to be onely for his being refractary to the King in
 this said matter of Marriage and Succession; which is but a very fleshly cause of
 Martyrdome, as I conceiue.
 
 And as for Roffensis his fellow Martyr (who could haue bene content to haue
 taken the Oath of the Kings Supremacie, with a certaine modification, which
 Moore refused) as his imprisonment was neither onely, nor principally for the
 cause of Supremacie, so died hee but a halting and a singular Martyr or witnesse
 for that most weighty head of doctrine; the whole Church of England going at
 that time, in one current and streame as it were against him in that Argument,
 diuers of them being of farre greater reputation for learning and sound iudge-
 ment, then euer he was. So as in this point we may well arme our selues with the
 Cardinals owne reason, where he giueth amongst other notes of the trew Church,
 Vniuersalitie for one, wee hauing the generall and Catholique conclusion of the
 whole Church of England , on our side in this case, as appeareth by their booke set
 out by the whole Conuocation of England , called, The Institution of a Christian
 man ; the same matter being likewise very learnedly handled by diuers particular
 learned men of our Church, as by Steuen Gardiner in his booke De vera obedientia, 
 with a Preface of Bishop Boners adioyning to it, De summo & absoluto Regis
 Imperio , published by M. Bekinsaw, De vera differentia Regiae Potestatis &
 Ecclesiasticae , Bishop Tonstals Sermon, Bishop Longlands Sermon, the letter of
 Tonstall to Cardinall Poole , and diuers other both in English and Latine. And
 if the bitternesse of Fishers discontentment had not bene fed with his dayly am-
 bitious expectation of the Cardinals hat, which came so neere as Calis before he
lost his head to fill it with, I haue great reason to doubt, if he would haue con-


 

stanly perseuered in induring his Martyrdome for that one most waighty head of
doctrine.
 
 And surely these two Captaines and ringleaders to Martyrdome were but ill
followed by the rest of their countreymen: for I can neuer reade of any after
them, being of any great accompt, and that not many, that euer sealed that
weighty head of doctrine with their blood in England . So as the trew causes of
their first falling in trouble (whereof I haue already made mention) being rightly
considered vpon the one part, and vpon the other the scant number of witnesses,
that with their blood sealed it (a point so greatly accompted of by our Cardinal)
there can but smal glory redound thereby to our English nation, these onely two
 Enoch and Elias , seruing for witnesses against our Antichristian doctrine.
 
 And I am sure the Supremacie of Kings may, & wil euer be better maintained
by the word of God (which must euer be the trew rule to discerne all waighty
heads of doctrine by) to be the trew and proper office of Christian Kings in their
owne dominions, then he will be euer able to maintaine his annihilating Kings,
and their authorities, together with his base and vnreuerend speaches of them,
wherewith both his former great Volumes, and his late Bookes against Venice 
are filled. In the old Testament, Kings were directly Gouernours over the
Church within their Dominions, purged their corruptions; reformed their abuses,
brought the Arke to her resting place, the King dancing before it; built the
Temple; dedicated the same, assisting in their owne persons to the sanctification
thereof; made the Booke of the Law new-found, to bee read to the people; 
renewed the Couenant between God and his people; bruised the brasen serpent
in pieces, which was set vp by the expresse commandement of God, and was a
figure of Christ; destroyed all Idoles, and false gods; made a publike reforma-
tion, by a Commission of Secular men and Priests mixed for that purpose; de-
posed the high Priest, and set vp another in his place: and generally, ordered
euery thing belonging to the Church-gouernment, their Titles and Prerogatiues
giuen them by God, agreeing to these their actions. They are called the Sonnes 
of the most High , nay, Gods themselues; The Lords anoynted, Sitting in Gods 
throne; His seruants; The Angels of God; According to his hearts desire; The
light of Israel; The nursing fathers of the Church , with innumerable such stiles of
honour, wherwith the old Testament is filled; whereof our aduersary can pretend
no ignorance. And as to the new Testament, Euery soule is commanded to be
subiect vnto them, euen for conscience sake . All men must be prayed for; but
especially Kings, and those that are in Authoritie, that vnder them we may leade a
godly, peaceable and an honest life. 

 

 The Magistrate is the minister of God, to doe vengeance on him that doeth euill,
 and reward him that doeth well. Ye must obey all higher powers, but especially
 Princes, and those that are supereminent. Glue euery man his due, feare to whom
feare belongeth, and honour to whome honour. Giue vnto Caesar what is Caesars,
and to God what is Gods. Regnum meum non est huius mundi. Quis me constituit
Iudicem super vos ? Reges gentium dominantur eorum, vos autem non sic. If
these examples, sentences, titles, and prerogatiues, and innumerable other in the
Old and New Testament doe not warrant Christian Kings, within their owne
dominions, to gouerne their Church, as well as the rest of their people, in being
 Custodes vtriusque Tabulae , not by making new Articles of Faith, (which is the
Popes office, as I said before) but by commanding obedience to be giuen to the
word of God, by reforming the religion according to his prescribed will, by
assisting the spirituall power with the temporall sword, by reforming of corrup-
tions, by procuring due obedience to the Church, by iudging, and cutting off all
friuolous questions and schismes, as Constantine did; and finally, by making
 decorum to be obserued in euery thing, and establishing orders to bee obserued in
all indifferent things for that purpose, which is the onely intent of our Oath of Su-
premacie: If this Office of a King, I say, doe not agree with the power giuen him
by Gods word, let any indifferent man voyd of passion, iudge. But how these
honourable offices, styles, and prerogatiues giuen by God to Kings in the Old and
New Testament, as I haue now cited, can agree with the braue styles and titles
that Bellarmine giueth them, I can hardly conceiue. 
 That Kings are rather slaues then Lords. 
 That they are not onely subiects to Popes, to Bishops, to Priests, but euen to
Deacons. 
 That an Emperour must content himselfe to drinke, not onely after a Bishop, but
after a Bishops Chaplen. 
 That Kings haue not their Authoritie nor Office immediatly from God, nor his
Law, but onely from the Laws of Nations. 
 That Popes haue degraded many Emperours, but neuer Emperour degraded the
Pope; nay, euen Bishops that are but the Popes vassals, may depose Kings, and
abrogate their lawes. 
 That Church-men are so farre aboue Kings, as the soule is aboue the body. 
 That Kings may be deposed by their people, for diuers respects. 
 But Popes can by no meanes be deposed: for no flesh hath power to iudge of them. 
 That obedience due to the Pope, is for conscience sake. 
 But the obedience due to Kings, is onely for certaine respects of order and policie. 

 
 
 That these very Church-men that are borne, and inhabite in Soueraigne Princes
 countreys, are notwithstanding not their Subiects, and cannot bee iudged by them,
 although they may iudge them. 
 
 And, that the obedience that Church-men glue to Princes, euen in the meanest
 and meere temporall things, is not by way of any necessarie subiection, but onely out of
 discretion, and for obseruation of good order and custome. 
 
 These contrarieties betweene the Booke of God, and Bellarmines bookes,
 haue I heere set in opposition each to other, Vt ex contrariis iuxta se positis,
 veritas magis elucescere possit . And thus farre I dare boldly affirme, that who-
 soeuer will indifferently weigh these irreconciliable contraditions here set downe,
 will easily confesse, that CHRIST is no more contrarie to Belial, light to darknesse,
 and heauen to hell, then Bellarmines estimation of Kings, is to Gods.
 
 Now as to the conclusion of his letter, which is onely filled with strong and
 pithie exhortations, to perswade and confirme Blackwell to the patient and con-
 stant induring of martyrdome, I haue nothing to answere, saue by way of regrate;
 that so many good sentences drawen out of the Scripture, so well and so hand-
 somely packed vp together, should be so ill and vntrewly applied: But an euill
 cause is neuer the better for so good a cloake; and an ill matter neuer amended by
 good wordes: And therefore I may iustly turne ouer that craft of the diuell vpon
 himselfe, in vsing so holy-like an exhortation to so euill a purpose. Onely I could
 haue wished him, that hee had a little better obserued his decorum herein, in not
 letting slippe two or three prophane words amongst so many godly mortified
 Scripture sentences. For in all the Scripture, especially in the New Testament, I
 neuer read of Pontifex Maximus . And the Pope must be content in that style to
 succeed according to the Law and institution of Numa Pompilius , and not to
 S. Peter , who neuer heard not dreamed of such an Office.
 
 And for his Caput fidei , which I remembred before, the Apostles (I am sure)
 neuer gaue that style to any, but to CHRIST: So as these styles, whereof some were
 neuer found in Scripture, and some were neuer applyed but to CHRIST in that
 sense, as hee applieth it, had beene better to haue beene left out of so holy and
 mortified a letter.
 
 To conclude then this present Discourse, I heartily with all indifferent readers
of the Breues and Letter, not to iudge by the speciousnesse of the wordes, but by
the weight of the matter; not looking to that which is strongly alledged, but
iudiciously to consider what is iustly prooued: And for all my owne good and
naturall Subiects, that their hearts may remaine established in the trewth; that
these forraine inticements may not seduce them from their natall and naturall
duetie; and that all aswell strangers, as naturall subiects, to whose eyes this Dis-
course shall come, may wisely and vnpartially iudge of the Veritie, as it is nakedly
here set downe, for clearing these mists and cloudes of calumnies, which were
iniustly heaped vpon me; for which end onely I heartily pray the courteous
Reader to be perswaded, that I tooke occasion to publish this Discourse.