THE L. Cardinall euen in the first passage of his Oration, hath laid a firme foun- dation,
 That Ecclesiastics in France are more deepely obliged to the King, then the
 Nobilitie, and third Estate : His reason; Because the Clergie doe sweetly enioy their
 dignities and promotions, with all their infinite wealth, of the Kings meere grace, without
 all danger, and with faire immunities; whereas the other two Orders hold their offices by a
 chargeable and burdensome title or tenure, euen to the great expence of their blood, and of
 their substance. But see now, how loose and weake a frame he hath erected and pinned together,
 vpon his firme and solide foundation: Ergo , the third Estate is to lay
 all care to prouide remedies against apposted cut-throats, vpon the Clergy; and the said
 remedies (as he boldly affirms) must be deriued from the laws of conscience, which may carry
 an effectual acting or operatiue efficacie vpon the soule, and not from ciuil or temporall
 punishments. Now this consequence limpeth like a lame creple after the premises: For it is no
 vsuall and common matter, to see men that are deepest in obligation, performe their duties and
 couenants with most fidelity. Againe, were it graunted the Clergie had well hitherto
 demonstrated their carefull watch- ing ouer the life and honour of their Prince; yet is it not
 for spirituall punish- ments thundered by Ecclesiastics, to bind the hands of the ciuill
 Magistrate, nor to stop the current of temporall punishments: which ordinarily doe carrie a
 greater force and vertue to the bridling of the wicked, then the apprehension of Gods
 iudgement. 
 The third Estate therefore, by whom all the officers of France are properly represented, as
 to whom the administration of iustice and protection of the Kings rights and Honour doth
 appertaine, can deserue no blame in carrying so watch- full an eye, by their wholesome remedie
 to prouide for the safetie of the King, and for the dignitie of his Crowne. For if the Clergie
 shall not stand to their tackle, but shrinke when it commeth to the push of their duetie; who
 shall charge them- selves with carefull foresight and preuention of mischiefes ? Shall not the
 people? Now, haue not all the calamities, which the third Estate haue sought prouidently to
 preuent; haue they not all sprung from the Clergie, as from their proper and naturall
 fountaine ? From whence did the last ciuill warres, wherein a world of blood was
 not more profusely then prodigiously and vnnaturally spilt, and wherein the parricide of King
 Henrie III . was impiously and abominably committed; from whence did
 those bloodie warres proceed, but from the deposing of the said King by the Head of the Church
 ? Were they not Prelats, Curats, and Confessours; were they not Ecclesiastics, who partly by
 seditious preachments, and partly by secret confessions, powred many a iarre of oyle vpon this
 flame ? Was not he that killed the forenamed King, was not he one of the Clergie ? Was not Guignard a Iesuite ? Was not Iohn Chastel brought
 vp in the same schoole? Did not Rauaillac that monster of men, vpon
 interrogatories made at his examination; among the rest, by whom he had beene so diabolically
 tempted and stirred vp to his most execrable attempt and act of extreme horror: did not he
 referre his examiners to the Sermons made the Lent next before, where they might be satis-
 fied concerning the causes of his abominable vndertaking and execution ? Are not Bellarmine, Eudaemonoiohannes, Suarez, Becanus, Mariana , with such other
 monsters, who teach the doctrine of parricides, vphold the craft of Ianus-like Equiuocations
 in Courts of Iustice, and in secret confessions: are they not all Clerics ? are not all their
 bookes approoued and allowed, as it were by a corpora- tion or grosse companie of Doctors,
 with their signes manuel to the said bookes ? What were the heads, the chiefe promoters, the
 complices of the powder-con- spiracie in my Kingdome ? were they not Ecclesiastics ? Hath not
 Faux by name, a confederate of the same damned crew; hath not he
 stoutly stood to the gun- ners part, which then he was to act in that most dolefull Tragedie,
 with asseuera- tion of a conscience well assured and setled, touching the lawfulnesse of his
 enter- prise? Did he not yeild this reason? to wit, because he had bin armed with instruction
 of musket proofe in the case, before he made passage ouer from the Low Countries ? Is it not
 also the generall beleefe of that Order, that Clerics are exempted from the condition of
 Subiects to the King ? Nay, is it not confessed by the L. Cardinall himselfe, that King-killers haue ingaged themselues to vndertake
 the detestable act of parricide vnder a false credence of Religion, as beeing instructed by
 their schoolemasters in Religion ? And who were they but Ecclesiasticall persons ? All this
 presupposed as matter of trewth, I draw this conclusion: Howsoeuer no small number of the
 French Clergie may perhaps beare the affection of louing Subiects to their King, and may not
 suffer the Cleri- call character to deface the impression of naturall allegiance; yet, for so
 much as the Order of Clerics is dipped in a deeper die, and beareth a worse tincture of
 daungerous practises then the other Orders; the third Estate had beene greatly wanting to
 their excellent prouidence and wisedome, if they should haue relin- quished and transferred
 the care of designements and proiects for the life of their King, and the safety of his
 Crowne, to the Clergie alone. Moreouer, the Clergie standeth bound to referre the iudgement of
 all matters of controuersie, to the sentence of the Pope, in this cause beeing a partie, and
 one that pretendeth Crownes to depend vpon his Mitre. What hope then might the
 third Estate conceiue, that his Holinesse would passe against his owne cause, when his iudge-
 ment of the controuersie had beene sundrie times before published and testified to the world ?
 And whereas the plot or modell of remedies proiected by the third Estate, and the Kings
 Officers, hath not prooued sortable in the euent: was it because the said remedies were not
 good and lawfull ? No verily: but because the Clergie refused to become contributors of their
 duty and meanes to the grand seruice. Likewise, for that after the burning of bookes,
 addressed to iustifie re- bellious people, traytors, and parricides of Kings; neuerthelesse
 the authors of the said bookes are winked at, and backt with fauour. Lastly, for that some
 wretched parricides drinke off the cuppe of publike iustice; whereas to the fire- brands of
 sedition, the sowers of this abominable doctrine, no man saith so much as blacke is their eye. 
 It sufficiently appeareth, as I supose, by the former passage, that his Lordship exhorting
 the third Estate to referre the whole care of this Regall cause vnto the Clergie, hath tacked
 his frame of weake ioynts and tenons to a very worthy but wrong foundations. Howbeit, he
 laboureth to fortifie his exhortation with a
 more weake and feeble reason: For to make good his proiect he affirmes, that matters and
 maximes out of all doubt and question may not be shuffled together with points in
 controueresie. Now his rules indubitable are two: The first, It is not lawfull to murther
 Kings for any cause whatsoeuer: This he confirmeth by the example of Saul (as he saith) deposed from his Throne, whose life or limbs Dauid neuerthelesse durst not once hurt or wrong for his life: Likewise he confirmes
 the same by a Decree of the Councill held at Constance: His other point indu- bitable; The Kings of France are
 Soueraignes in all Temporall Soueraigntie, within the French Kingdome, and hold not by fealtie
 either of the Pope, as hau- ing received or obliged their Crownes vpon such tenure and
 condition, or of any other Prince in the whole world; Which point, neuerthelesse he takes not
 for certaine and indubitable, but onely according to humane and historicall certain- tie. Now
 a third point he makes to be so full of controuersie, and so farre within the circle of
 disputable questions, as it may not be drawne into the ranke of classicall and authenticall
 points, for feare of making a certaine point doubtfull, by shuffling and iumbling therewith
 some point in controuersie. Now the ques- tion so disputable, as he pretendeth, is this: A
 Christian Prince breaks his oath solemnely taken to God, both to liue and to die in the
 Catholique Religion: Say this Prince turnes Arrian, or Mahometan, fals to proclaime open
 warre, and to wage battell with Iesus Christ: Whether may such a Prince be declared to haue
 lost his Kingdome, and who shall declare the Subjects of such a Prince to be quit of their
 oath of allegiance ? The L. Cardinall holds the affirmatiue, and makes no bones to maintaine,
 that all other parts of the Catholique Church, yea the French Church, euen from the first
 birth of her Theologicall Schooles, to 
 Caluins time and teaching, haue professed that such a Prince may bee
 lawfully remooued from his Throne by the Pope, and by the Councill: and suppose the contrarie
 doctrine were the very Quintessence or spirit of trewth, yet might it not in case of faith be
 vrged and pressed otherwise then by way of problematicall disceptation. That is the summe of
 his Lordships ample discourse: The refuting whereof I am constrained to put off, and referre
 vnto an other place; because he hath serued vs with the same dishes ouer and ouer againe.
 There we shall see the L. Cardinall maketh way to the dispatching of Kings after deposition:
 that Saul was not deposed, as he hath presumed: that in the Councill of
 Constance there is nothing to the purpose of murthering Soueraigne Princes: that his Lord-
 ship, supposing the French King may be depriued of his Crowne by a superiour power, doth not
 hold his liege Lord to be Soueraine in France: that by the posi- tion of the French Church
 from aage to aage, the Kings of France are not subiect vnto any censure of deposition by the
 Pope: that his Holinesse hath no iust and lawfull pretence to produce, that any Christian King
 holds of him by fealtie, or is obliged to doe the Pope homage for his Crowne. 
 Well then, for the purpose; he dwelleth onely vpon the third point pretended questionable,
 and this hee affirmeth: If any shall condemne, or wrappe vnder the solemne curse, the
 abettours of the Popes power to vn-king lawfull and Soueraigne Kings; the same shall runne
 vpon four dangerous rocks of apparent incongruities and absurdities. 
 First, he shall offer to force and entangle the consciences of many deuout per- sons: For he
 shall binde them to beleeue and sweare that doctrine, the contrary whereof is beleeued of the
 whole Church, and hath bene beleeued by their Predecessors. 
 
 Secondly, he shall ouerturne from top to bottome the sacred authoritie of holy Church, and
 shall set open a gate vnto all sorts of heresie, by allowing Lay- persons a bold libertie to
 be iudges in causes of Religion and Faith: For what is that degree of boldnesse, but open
 vsurping of the Priesthood; what is it but putting of prophane hands vpon the Arke; what is it
 but laying of vnholy fingers vpon the holy Censor for perfumes ? 
 Thirdly, hee shall make way to a Schisme, not possible to bee put by and auoyded by any
 humane prouidence. For this doctrine beeing held and pro- fessed by all other Catholiques; how
 can we declare it repugnant vnto Gods word; how can wee hold it impious; how can wee account
 it detestable, but wee shall renounce communion with the Head and other members of the Church;
 yea, we shall confesse the Church in all aages to haue bene the Synagogue of Satan, and the
 spouse of the Deuill ? 
 Lastly, by working the establishment of this Article, which worketh an estab- lishment of
 Kings Crownes; He shall not onely worke the intended remedy for the danger of Kings, out of
 all the vertue and efficacie thereof, by weakening of doctrine out of all
 controuersie, in packing it vp with a disputable question; but likewise in stead of securing
 the life and estate of Kings, he shall draw both into farre greater hazards, by the traine or
 sequence of warres, and other calamities, which vsually waite and attend on Schismes. 
 The L. Cardinall spends his whole discourse in confirmation of these foure heads, which wee
 now intend to sift in order, and demonstratiuely to prooue that all the said inconueniences
 are meere nullities, matters of imagination, and built vpon false presuppositions. But before
 wee come to the maine, the reader is to be enformed and aduertised, that his Lordship setteth
 a false glosse vpon the question; and propounds the case not onely contrary to the treweth of
 the sub- iect in controuersie, but also to the Popes owne minde and meaning: For he restraines
 the Popes power to depose Kings, onely to cases of Heresie, Apostasie, and persecuting of the
 Church; whereas Popes extend their power to a further distance. They depose Princes for
 infringing, or in any sort diminishing the Priuiledges of Monasteries: witnesse Gregorie the first in the pretended Charter granted to the Abbey of S. Medard at Soissons ; the said Charter beeing
 annexed to his Epistles in the rere. The same hee testifieth in his Epistle to Senator , by name the tenth of the eleuenth booke. They depose for naturall
 dulnesse and lacke of capacitie, wether in-bred and trew indeed, or onely pretended and imag-
 ined: witnesse the glorious vaunt of Gregory VII. that Childeric King of France was hoysted out of his Throne by Pope Zachary, 
 Not so much for his wicked life, as for his vnablenesse to beare the weightie burden of so
 great a Kingdome . They depose for collating of Benefices and Prebends: witnesse the
 great quarrels and sore contentions betweene Pope Innocent III. and Iohn King of England: as also between Philip the
 Faire and Boniface VIII. They depose for adulteries and Matrimoniall
 suites: witnes Philip I. for the repudiating or casting off his law-
 full wife Bertha , and marrying in her place with Bertrade wife to the Earle of Aniou. Finally, faine would I learne into what Heresie or
 degree of Apostasie, either Henry IV. or Frederic
 Barbarossa , or Frederic II. Emperours were fallen, when they were
 smitten with Papall fulminations, euen to the depriuation of their Imperiall Thrones. What ? was it for Heresie or
 Apostasie, that Pope Martin IV. bare so hard a hand against Peter King of Arragon, that he acquitted and released the Aragonnois from
 their oath of Alleagiance to Peter their lawfull King ? Was it for
 Heresie or Apostasie, for Arrianisme or Mahumetisme, that Lewis XII. so
 good a King and Father of his Countrey, was put downe by Iulius the II
 ? Was it for Heresie or Apostasie, that Sixtus V. vsurped a power
 against Henrie III. euen so farr as to denounce him unkingd; the issue whereof was the
 parricide of that good King, and the most woefull desolation of a most flourish- ing Kingdome
 ? But his Lordship best liked to worke vpon that ground, which to the outward shew and
 appearance, is the most beautifull cause that can be al- leaged for the dishonouring of Kings
 by the weapon of deposition: making him- selfe to beleeue that he acted the part
 of an Orator before personages not much acquainted with ancient and moderne histories, and
 such as little vnderstood the state of the question then in hand. It had therefore beene a
 good warrant for his Lordship, to haue brought some authenticall instrument from the Pope,
 whereby the French might haue beene secured, that his Holinesse renounceth all other causes
 auouchable for the degrading of Kings; and that he will henceforth rest in the case of
 Heresie, for the turning of Kings out of their Free-hold: as also that his Holinesse by the
 same or like instrument might haue certified his pleasure, that hee will not hereafter make
 himselfe Iudge, whether Kings bee tainted with damnable Heresie, or free from Hereticall
 infection. For that were to make him selfe both Iudge and Plaintiffe, that it might be in his
 power to call that doctrine Hereticall, which is pure Orthodoxe: and all for this end, to make
 himselfe master of the Kingdome, and there to settle a Successour, who receiuing the Crowne of
 the Popes free gift and grant, might be tyed thereby to depend altogether vpon his Holinesse.
 Hath not Pope Boniface VIII. declared in his proud Letters all those to
 be Heretiques, that dare vndertake to afirme, the collating of Prebends apperteineth to the
 King ? It was that Popes grosse errour, not in the fact, but in the right. The like crime
 forsooth was by Popes imputed to the vnhappy Em- perour Henrie IV. And
 what was the issue of the said imputation? The sonne is instigated thereby to rebell against
 his father, and to impeach the interrement of his dead corps, who neuer in his life had beate
 his braines to trouble the sweet waters of Theologicall fountaines. It is recorded by Auentine, 
 that Bishop Virgilius was declared Heretique, for teaching the Position
 of Antipodes. The Bull Exurge , marching in the rere of the last Lateran Councel, sets downe this
 Position for one of Luthers heresies, A new life is
 the best repentance . Among the crimes which the Councel of Constance charged Pope Iohn XXIII.
 withall, one was this, that hee denied the immortalitie of the soule, and that so much was pub- liquely, manifestly, and notoriously knowen . Now if the
 Pope shall be caried by the streame of these or the like errours, and in his Hereticall
 prauitie shall de- pose a King of the contrary opinion, I shall hardly bee perswaded, the said
 King is lawfully deposed.

THE FIRST INCONVENIENCE EXAMINED. 
 THE first inconuenience growing (in the Cardinall his conceit) by entertaining the Article
 of the third Estate (whereby the Kings of France are declared to be indeposeable by any
 superiour power spirituall or temporall) is this: It offereth force to the
 conscience, vnder the penaltie of Anathema, to condemne a doctrine be- leeued and practised
 in the Church, in the continuall current of the last eleuen hun- dred yeeres . In these
 words he maketh a secret confession, that in the first flue hundred yeeres, the same doctrine
 was neither apprehended by faith, nor ap- prooued by practise. Wherein, to my
 vnderstanding, the L. Cardinall volun- tarily giueth ouer the suite: For the Church in the
 time of the Apostles, their disciples, and successors, for 500. yeeres together, was no more
 ignorant what authoritie the Church is to challenge ouer Emperours and Kings, then at any time
 since in any succeeding aage; in which as pride hath still flowed to the height of a full Sea,
 so puritie of religion and manners hath kept for the most part at a lowe water marke. Which
 point is the rather to be considered, for that during the first 500. yeeres, the Church groned
 vnder the heauy burthen, both of heathen Emperours, and of hereticall Kings; the Visigot Kings
 in Spaine, and the Vandals in Africa. Of whose displeasure the Pope had small reason or cause
 to stand in any feare, beeing so remote from their dominions, and no way vnder the lee of
 their Soueraigntie. 
 But let vs come to see, what aide the L. Cardinall hath amassed and piled together out of
 latter histories: prouided wee still beare in mind, that our ques- tion is not of popular
 tumults, nor of the rebellion of subjects making insurrec- tions out of their owne
 discontented spirits and brainesicke humors, nor of law- full Excommunications, nor of
 Canonicall censures and reprehensions; but onely of a iuridicall sentence of deposition,
 pronounced by the Pope, as armed with ordinary and lawfull power to depose, against a
 Soueraigne Prince. 
 Now then, The L. Cardinall sets on, and giues the first charge with Anasta- sius the Emperour, whom Euphemius Patriarke of
 Constantinople would neuer acknowledge for Emperour: (that is to say, would neuer consent he
 should be created Emperour by the helpe of his voice or suffrage) except he would first
 subscribe to the Chalcedon Creed: notwithstanding the great Empresse
 and Sen- ate sought by violent courses and practises to make him yeeld. And when after- ward
 the said Emperour, contrary to his oath taken, played the relaps by falling into his former
 heresie, and became a persecutor; he was first admonished, and then excommunicated by Symmachus Bishop of Rome. To this the L. Cardinall addes, that when the
 said Emperour was minded to choppe the poison of his hereticall assertions into the publique
 formes of diuine seruice, then the people of Constantinople made an vproare against Anastasius their Emperour; and one of his Commanders by force of armes,
 constrained him to call backe certaine Bishops whom he had sent into banishment before. 
 In this first example the L. Cardinall by his good leaue, neither comes close to the
 question, nor salutes it a farre off. Euphemius was not Bishop of Rome:
 Anastasius was not deposed by Euphemius ; the
 Patriarch onely made no way to the creating of Anastasius . The suddaine
 commotion of the base multitude makes nothing, the rebellion of a Greeke Commaunder makes
 lesse, for the author- izing of the Pope to depose a Soueraigne Prince. The Greeke Emperour
 was ex- communicated by Pope Symmachus : who knowes whether that be trew
 or forged ? For the Pope himselfe is the onely witnesse here produced by the L. 
 Cardinall vpon the point: and who knowes not how false, how supposititious, the writings and
 Epistles of the auncient Popes are iustly esteemed ? But graunt it a trewth; yet Anastasius excommunicated by Pope Symmachus , is not
 Anastasius deposed by Pope Symmachus . And to
 make a full answere, I say further, that excommunication denounced by a forraine Bishop,
 against a party not beeing within the limits of his iurisdiction, or one of his owne flocke,
 was not any barre to the party from the communion of the Church, but onely a kind of
 publication, that he the said Bishop in his particular, would hold no further communion with
 any such party. 
 For proofe whereof, I produce the Canons of the Councils held at Carthage. In one of the
 said Canons it is thus prouided and ordained; If any Bishop shall wilfully absent
 himselfe from the vsuall and accustomed Synodes, let him not be admitted to the communion of
 other Churches, but let him onely vfe the benefit and libertie of his owne
 Church . In an other of the same Canons thus; If a Bishop shall insinuate himselfe
 to make a conueiance of his Monasterie, and the ordering thereof vnto a Monke of any other
 Cloister; let him be cut off, let him be sepa- rated from the communion with
 other Churches and content himselfe to liue in the communion of his owne flocke . In the
 same sense Hilarius Bishop of Poictiers excommunicated Liberius 
 Bishop of Rome, for subscribing to the Arrian Con- fession. In the same sense, Iohn Bishop of Antioch excommunicated Celestine of
 Rome, and Cyrill of Alexandria, Bishops; for proceeding to sentence
 against Nestorius , without staying his comming to answere in his owne
 cause. In the same sense likewise, Victor Bishop of Rome did cut off
 all the Bishops of the East, not from the communion of their owne flocke, but from communion
 with Victor and the Romane Church. What resemblance, what agreement,
 what propor- tion, betweene this course of excommunication, and that way of vniust fulmina-
 tion which the Popes of Rome haue vsurped against Kings, but yet certaine long courses of time
 after that auncient course ? 
 And this may stand for a full answere likewise to the example of Clotharius. This ancient King of the
 French, fearing the censures of Pope Agapetus , erected the Territorie
 of Yuetot vnto the title of a Kingdome, by way of satisfaction for murdering of Gualter , Lord of Yuetot. For this example the L. Cardinall hath ransackt
 records of 900. yeares antiquitie and vpward; in which times it were no hard piece of worke to
 shew, that Popes would not haue any hand, nor so much as a finger in the affaires and acts of
 the French Kings. Gregorie of Tours that liued in the same aage, hath
 recorded many acts of excesse, and violent iniuries done against Bishops by their Kings, and
 namely against Praetextatus Bishop of Roan; for any of which iniurious
 prankes then played, the Bishop of Rome durst not reprooue the said Kings with
 due remonstrance. But see heere the words of Gregorie himselfe to King
 Chilperic: If any of vs, 0 King, shall swarue from the path of Iustice, him
 hast thou power to punish: But in case thou shalt at any time transgresse the lines of
 equitie, who shall once touch thee with re- proofe ? To thee wee speake, but are neuer heeded
 and regarded, except it be thy pleasure: and bee thou not pleased, who shall challenge thy
 greatnesse, but hee that iustly challengeth to bee Iustice it selfe ? The good Bishop,
 notwithstanding these humble remonstrances, was but roughly entreated, and packt into exile,
 being banished into the Isle of Guernsay. But I am not minded to make any deepe search or
 inquisition, into the titles of the Lords of Yuetot; whose honourable priuiledges and titles
 are the most honourable badges and cognizances of their Ancestours, and of some remarkeable
 seruice done to the Crowne of France: so farre I take them to differ from a satisfaction for
 sinne: And for the purpose I onely affirme, that were the credit of this historie beyond all
 exception, yet makes it nothing to the present question, Wherein the power of deposing, and
 not of excommunicating supreme Kings, is debated. And suppose the King by Charter granted the
 said priuiledges for feare of Excommunication; how is it prooued thereby, that Pope Agapetus had lawfull and ordinary power to depriue him of his Crowne? Nay,
 doubtlesse it was rather a meanes to eleuate and aduance the dignitie of the Crowne of France,
 and to style the French King, a King of Kings, as one that was able to giue the qualitie of
 King, to all the rest of the Nobles and Gentry of his Kingdome. Doeth not some part of the
 Spanish Kings greatnesse, consist in creating of his, great ? 
 In the next place followeth Gregorie I . who in the 10. Epistle of the 11. booke, confirming
 the priuiledges of the Hospitall at Augustodunum in Bourgongne , pro- hibiteth all Kings and Prelates whatsoeuer, to infringe or diminish
 the said priuiledges, in whole or in part. His formall and expresse words bee these: If any King, Prelate, Iudge, or any other Secular person, informed of this our
 Constuti- tion, shall presume to goe or doe contrary thereunto, let him bee cast downe from
 his power and dignitie . I answere; the Lord Cardinall heere wrongs himselfe very much,
 in taking imprecations for Decrees. Might not euen the meanest of the people vse the same
 tenour of words, and say ? If any shall touch the life, or the most sacred Maiestie of our
 Kings, be he Emperour, or be he Pope, let him bee accursed; let him fall from his eminent
 place of authoritie; let him lose his dignitie; let him tumble into beggerie, diseases, and
 all kindes of calamities ? I forbeare to shew how easie a matter it is for Monkes, to forge
 titles after their owne humour, and to their owne liking, for the vpholding and maintaining of
 their priuiledges. As for the purpose, the same Gregorie citeth in the
 end of his Epistles another priuiledge, of the like stuffe and stampe to the former, granted
 to the Abbey of S. Medard at Soissons: It is fenced with a like clause
 to the other; But of how great vntrewth, and of how little weight it is, the very date that it
 beareth, makes manifest proofe: For it runs, Dated the yeere of our Lords In-
 carnation 593. the 11. Indiction; whereas the 10. Indiction agreeth to the yeere 593. Besides,
 it was not Gregories maner to date his Epistles, according to the yeere
 of the Lord. Againe, the said priuiledge was signed by the Bishops of Alexandria and Carthage,
 who neuer knew (as may well bee thought) whether any such Abbey of S. Medard , or citie of Soissions, was euer built in the world. Moreouer, they signed in
 the thickest of a crowd as it were of Italian Bishops. Lastly, hee that shall reade in this
 Gregories Epistles, with what spirit of reuerence and humilitie he
 speaketh of Emperours, will hardly beleeue that euer hee armed himselfe with authoritie to
 giue or to take away Kingdomes. Hee styles him- selfe The Emperours vnworthie seruant: presuming to speake vnto his Lord, when he
 knowes himselfe to bee but dust and a very worme: Hee professeth subiection vnto the
 Emperours commands, euen to the publishing of a certaine Law of the Emperours which in his
 iudgement somewhat iarred and iustled with Gods Law ; as elsewhere I haue spoken more at
 large. 
 The L. Cardinall next bringeth vpon the stage Iustinian II . Hee, being in some choller with Sergius Bishop of Rome, because hee would not fauour the erroneous Synode
 of Constantinople, would haue caused the Bishop to bee ap- prehended by his Constable Zacharias . But by the Romane Militia , (that is, the
 troupes which the Emperour then had in Italie) Zacharias was repulsed
 and hindered from his deseigne, euen with opproborius and reproachfull termes. His Lordship
 must haue my shallownesse excused, if I reach not his intent by this Allegation; wherein I see
 not one word of deposing from the Empire, or of any sentence pronounced by the Pope. 
 Heere are now 712. yeeres expired after the birth of Iesus Christ: in all which long tract
 of time, the L. Cardinal hath not light vpon any instance, which might make for his purpose
 with neuer so little shew: For the example of the Emperor Philippicus by the Cardinal alledged
 next in sequence, belongeth to the yeere 713. And thus lies the historie: This Emperour Philippicus Bardanes , was a professed enemie to the worshipping of Images,
 and commanded them to be broken in pieces. In that very time the Romane Empire was ouerthrowen
 in the West, and sore shaken by the Saracenes in the East. Besides those miseries, the
 Emperour was also incumbred with a ciuill and intestine warre. The greatest part of Italie was
 then seized by the Lombards, and the Emperour in Italie had nothing left saue onely the
 Exarchat of Rauenna, and the Dutchie of Rome, then halfe abandoned by reason of the Emperours
 want of forces. Pope Constantine gripes this occasion whereon to ground
 his greatnesse, and to shake off the yoke of the Emperour his Lord, Undertakes against Philippicus the cause of Images: by a Councel declares the Emperour
 Heretique: Prohibites his rescripts or coine to bee receiued, and to goe current
 in Rome: Forbids his Imperiall statue to bee set vp in the Temple, according to ancient
 custome: The tumult groweth to a height: The Pope is principall promoter of the tumult: In the
 heate of the tumult the Exarche of Rauenna loseth his life. Here see now the mutinie of a
 subiect against his Prince, to pull from him by force and violence a citie of his Empire. But
 who seeth in all this any sentence of deposition from the Imperiall dignitie ? Nay, the Pope
 then missed the cushion, and was disappointed vtterly of his pur- pose: The citie of Rome
 stood firme, and continued still in their obedience to the Emperour. 
 About some 12. yeeres after, the Emperour Leo Isauricus 
 (whom the Lord of Perron calleth Iconoclast ) falles'to fight it out at sharpe, and to prosecute worshippers
 of Images with all extremitie. Vpon this occasion, Pope Gregory 2. then
 treading in the steps of his predecessor, when he perceiued the citie of Rome to be but
 weakely prouided of men or munition, and the Emperour to haue his hands full in other places,
 found such meanes to make the citie rise in rebellious armes against the Emperour, that he
 made himselfe in short time master thereof. Thus farre the Lord Cardinall, whereunto my
 answere for satisfaction is; that degrading an Emperour from his Imperiall dignitie, and
 reducing a citie to reuolt against her Master, that a man at last may carry the piece
 himselfe, and make himselfe Lord thereof, are two seuerall actions of speciall difference. If
 the free- hold of the citie had beene conueied to some other by the Pope depriuing the
 Emperour, as proprietarie thereof, this example might haue challenged some credit at least in
 shew: but so to inuade the citie to his owne vse, and so to seize on the right and authority
 of another, what is it but open rebellion, and notorious ambition ? For it is farre from
 Ecclesiasticall censure, when the spirituall Pastor of soules forsooth, pulles the cloake of a
 poore sinner from his backe by violence, or cuts his purse, and thereby appropriates an other
 mans goods to his priuate vse. It is to be obserued withall, that when the Emperours were not
 of sufficient strength, and Popes had power to beard and to braue Emperours, then these Papall
 practises were first set on foot. This Emperour notwithstanding, turned head and peckt againe:
 his Lieutenant entred Rome, and Gregorie 3. successor to this Gregorie 2. was glad to honour the same Emperour with style and title of
 his Lord: witnesse two seuerall Epistles of the said Gregorie 3. written to Boni- face , and subscribed in
 this forme: Dated the tenth Calends of December: In the raigne of our most
 pious and religious Lord, Augustus Leo, crowned of God, the great Emperour, in the tenth
 yeere of his raigne. 
 
 The L. Cardinall with no lesse abuse alleadgeth Pope Zacharie , by
 whom the French, as he affirmeth, were absolued of the oath of allegiance, wherein they stood
 bound to Childeric their King: And for this instance, he standeth vpon
 the testimonie of Paulus Aemilius , and du
 Tillet , a paire of late writers. But by authors more neere that aage wherin
 Childeric raigned, it is more trewly testified, that it was a free and
 voluntarie act of the French, onely asking the aduise of Pope Zacharie ,
 but requiring neither leaue nor absolution. Ado Bishop of Vienna, in his Chronicles hath it after this manner: The
 French, following the Counsell of Embassadors, and of Pope , Zachary elected Pepin their King, and established him in the Kingdome.
 Trithemius in his abridgement of Annals, thus: Childeric, as one vnfit
 for gouernement, was turned out of his Kingdome, with common consent of the Estates and
 Peeres of the Realme, so aduised by Zacharie Pope of Rome, God- fridus of Viterbe in the 17. part of his Chronicle; and Guauguin in the life of Pepin, affirme the same. And was it not
 an easie matter to worke Pepin by counsell to lay hold on the Kingdome,
 when he could not be hindered from fastening on the Crowne, and had already seizd it in
 effect, howsoeuer he had not yet attained to the name of King ? Moreouer, the rudenesse of
 that Nation, then wanting knowledge and Schooles either of divinitie, or of Academicall
 sciences, was a kind of spurre to make them runne for counsell ouer the mountaines: which
 neuerthelesse in a cause of such nature, they required not as necessary, but onely as decent
 and for fashion sake. The Pope also for his part was well appaied, by this meanes to draw Pepin vnto his part; as one that stood in some neede of his aide against
 the Lombards; and the more, because his Lord the Emperour of Constantinople was then brought
 so low, that hee was not able to send him suf- ficient aide, for the defence of his
 territories against his enemies. But had Zacha- rie (to deale plainely)
 not stood vpon the respect of his owne commodity, more then vpon the regard of Gods feare; he
 would neuer haue giuen counsell vnto the seruant, vnder the pretended colour of his Masters
 dull spirit, so to turne rebell against his Master. The Lawes prouide Gardians, or ouerseers,
 for such as are not well in their wits; they neuer depriue and spoile them of their estate:
 they punish crimes, but not diseases and infirmities by nature. Yea, in France it is a very
 auncient custome, when the King is troubled in his wits to establish a Regent, who for the
 time of the Kings disability, may beare the burden of the Kingdomes affaires. So was the
 practise of that State in the case of Charles 6. when hee fell into a
 phrensie; whom the Pope notwithstanding his most grieuous and sharpe fits, neuer offered to
 degrade. And to be short, what reason, what equity will beare the children to be punished for
 the fathers debilitie ? Yet such punishment was laid vpon Childerics 
 whole race and house; who by this practise were all disinherited of the Kingdome. But shall
 wee now take some view, of the L. Cardinals excuse for this exemplarie fact ? The cause of Childerics de- posing,
 (as the L. Cardinall saith) did neerely concerne and touch Religion: For Childerics imbecillity brought all France into danger, to suffer a most wofull
 shipwracke of Christian religion, vpon the barbarous and hostile inuasion of the Saracens.
 Admit now this reason had beene of iust weight and value, yet con- sideration should haue
 beene taken, whether some one or other of that Royall stemme, and of the Kings
 owne successors neerest of blood, was not of better capacity to rule and mannage that mighty
 State. The feare of vncertaine and accidentall mischiefe, should not haue driuen them to flie
 vnto the certaine mis- chiefe of actuall and effectuall deposition. They should rather haue
 set before their eies the example of Charles Martel , this Pepins father; who in a farre more eminent danger, when the Saracens had
 already mastered, and subdued a great part of France, valiantly encountred, and withall
 defeated the Saracens; ruled the Kingdome vnder the title of Steward of
 the Kings house, the principall Officer of the Crowne; without affecting or aspiring to the
 Throne for all that great step of aduantage, especially when the Saracens were quite broken,
 and no longer dreadfull to the French Nation. 
 In our owne Scotland, the sway of the Kingdome was in the hand of Walles, during the time of Bruse his imprisonment in England,
 who then was lawfull heire to the Crowne. This Walles or Vallas had the whole power of the King- dome at his becke and command. His
 Edicts and ordinances to this day stand in full force. By the deadly hatred of Bruse his mortall enemie, it may be con- iectured, that he might haue bene
 prouoked and inflamed with desire to trusse the Kingdome in his tallants. And notwithstanding
 all these incitements, he neuer assumed or vsurped other title to himselfe, then of Gouernour
 or Adminis- tratour of the Kingdome. The reason: Hee had not beene brought vp in this new
 doctrine and late discipline, whereby the Church is endowed with power to giue and to take
 away Crownes. But now (as the L. Cardinall would beare the world in hand) the state of Kings
 is brought to a very dead lift. The Pope for- sooth must send his Physicians, to know by way
 of inspection or some other course of Art, whether the Kings braine be cract or sound: and in
 case there be found any debilitie of wit and reason in the King, then the Pope must remooue
 and translate the Crowne, from the weaker braine to a stronger: and for the acting of the
 stratageme, the name of Religion must be pretended. Ho, these Heretikes be- gin to crawle in
 the Kingdome: order must bee taken they bee not suffered by their multitudes and swarmes, like
 locusts or caterpillers to pester and poison the whole Realme. Or in a case of Matrimony,
 thus: Ho, marriage is a Sacra- ment: touch the Order of Matrimonie, and Religion is wounded.
 By this deuice not onely the Kings vices, but likewise his naturall diseases and infirmities
 are fetcht into the circle of Religion; and the L. Cardinall hath not done himselfe right, in
 restraining the Popes power to depose Kings, vnto the cases of Heresie, Apostasie, and
 persecution of the Church. 
 In the next place followeth Leo III. who by setting the Imperial
 Crowne vpon the head of Charles , absolued all the Subiects in the West,
 of their obedience to the Greeke Emperours, if the L. of Perron might bee credited in this
 Example. But indeed it is crowded among the rest by a slie trick, and cleane contrary to the
 naked trewth of all histories: For it shall neuer be iustified by good historie, that so much
 as one single person or man (I say not one Countrey, or one people) was then
 wrought or wonne by the Pope to change his copy and Lord, or from a subiect of the Greeke
 Emperours, to turne subiect vnto Charlemaine . Let me see but one Towne
 that Charlemaine recouered from the Greeke Emperours, by his right and
 title to his Empire in the West: No, the Greeke Emperours had taken their farewell of the West
 Empire long before: And therefore to nicke this vpon the tallie of Pope Leo his Acts, that he tooke away the West from the Greeke Emperour, it is euen as if
 one should say, that in this aage the Pope takes the Dukedome of Milan 
 from the French Kings, or the citie of Rome from the Em- perours of Germanie, because their
 Predecessours in former aages had beene right Lords and gouernours of them both. It is one of
 the Popes ordinary and solemne practises to take away, much after the maner of his gluing. For
 as he giueth what he hath not in his right and power to giue, or bestoweth vpon others what is
 already their owne; euen so he taketh away from Kings and Emperors the possessions which they
 haue not in present hold and possession. After this maner he takes the West from the Greeke
 Emperors, when they hold nothing in the West, and lay no claime to any citie or towne of the
 West Empire. And what shall wee call this way of depriuation, but spoiling a naked man of his
 garments, and killing a man already dead ? Trew it is the Imperiall Crowne was then set on Charle- maines head by Leo the Pope: did Leo therefore giue him the Empire ? No more then a Bishop that crownes a
 King, at his Royall and solemne consecration, doeth giue him the Kingdome: For shall the Pope
 himselfe take the Popedome from the Bishop of Ostia as of his gift,
 because the crowning of the Pope is an Office of long time peculiar to the Ostian Bishop ? It was the custome of Emperours, to be crowned Kings of Italy by the
 hands of the Archbishop of Milan : did he therefore giue the Kingdome of
 Italy to the said Emperours ? And to returne vnto Charlemaine ; If the
 Pope had conueyed the Empire to him by free and gracious donation, the Pope doubtlesse in the
 solemnitie of his coronation, would neuer haue perfourmed vnto his owne creature, an Emperour
 of his owne making the dueties of adoration, as Ado that liued in the
 same aage, hath left it on record: After the solemne prayses ended 
 (saith Ado) the chiefe Bishop honoured him with adoration, according to the custome of
 ancient Princes . The same is likewise put downe by Auentine , in the 4. booke of
 his Annals of Bauaria . The like by the President Fauchet in his Antiquities: and by Monsieur Petau Counsellour in
 the Court of Parliament at Paris , in his Preface before the Chronicles
 of Eusebius, Hierome , and Sigebert . It
 was therefore the people of Rome , that called this Charles the Great vnto the Imperiall dignitie, and cast on him the title of Em- perour.
 So testifieth Sigebert vpon the yeere 801. All the
 Romanes with one generall voice and consent, ring out acclamations of Imperiall praises to
 the Emperour, they crowne him by the hands of Leo the Pope, they giue
 him the style of Caesar and 
 Augustus. Marianus Scotus hath as much in effect: Charles was then called Augustus by the Romanes . And so Platina: After
 the solemne seruice , Leo de- clareth and proclaimeth Charles Emperour, according to the publike Decree and gen- erall request of the people
 of Rome. Auentine , and Sigonius in his 4. booke of the Kingdome of Italie witnesse the same. Neuerthelesse, to gratifie the L. Cardinall;
 Suppose Pope Leo dispossessed the Greeke Emperours of the West Empire:
 What was the cause? what infamous acte had they done? what prophane and irreli- gious crime
 had they committed ? Nicephorus and Irene , who
 reigned in the Greeke Empire in Charlemaines time, were not reputed by
 the Pope, or taken for Here- tikes. How then ? The L. Cardinall helpeth at a pinch, and
 putteth vs in minde, that Constantine and Leo ,
 predecessours to the said Emperours, had beene poysoned with Heresie, and stained with
 persecution. Here then behold an Or- thodoxe Prince deposed: For what cause ? for Heresie
 forsooth, not in himselfe, but in some of his Predecessors long before. An admirable case: For
 I am of a contrary minde, that he was worthy of double honour, in restoring and setting vp the
 trewth againe, which vnder his predecessors had endured oppression, and suffered persecution.
 Doubtlesse Pope Siluester was greatly ouerseene, and played not well
 the Pope, when hee winked at Constantine the Great, and cast him not
 downe from his Imperiall Throne, for the strange infidelitie and Pagan- isme of Diocletian, of Maximian , and Maxentius , whom Constantine succeeded in the Empire. 
 From this example the L. of Perron passeth to Fulke Archbishop of Reims: by whom Charles the Simple was threatned
 with Excommunication, and refusing to continue any longer in the fidelity and allegiance of a
 subject. To what pur- pose is this example ? For who can be ignorant, that all aages haue
 brought forth turbulent and stirring spirits, men altogether forgetfull of respect and
 obseruance towards their Kings, especially when the world finds them shallow and simple-
 witted, like vnto this Prince ? But in this example, where is there so much as one word of the
 Pope, or the deposing of Kings ? 
 Here the L. Cardinall chops in the example of Philip I. King of France but mangled, and
 strangely disguised, as hereafter shall be shewed. 
 At last he leadeth vs to Gregory VII. surnamed Hildebrand , the
 scourge of Emperours, the firebrand of warre, the scorne of his aage. This Pope, after he had
 (in the spirit of pride, and in the very height of all audaciousnesse) thundred the sentence
 of excommunication and deposition, against the Emperour Henry IIII,
 after he had enterprised this act without all precedent example: after he had filled all
 Europe with blood: this Pope, I say, sunke downe vnder the weight of his affaires, and died as
 a fugitiue at Salerne , ouerwhelmed with discontent and
 sorrow of heart: Here lying at the point of giuing vp the ghoast, calling vnto him (as it is
 in Sigebert ) a certaine Cardinall whom he much fauoured, He con- fesseth
 to God, and Saint Peter, and the whole Church, that he had beene
 greatly de- fectiue in the Pastorall charge committed to his care; and that by the Deuils
 instiga- tion, he had kindled the fire of Gods wrath and hatred against mankind: Then hee
 sent his Confessor to the Emperour, and to the whole Church to pray for his pardon, because
 hee perceiued that his life was at an end . Likewise Cardinall Benno that liued in the said Gregories time, doth testifie, That so soone as he was risen out of his Chaire to excommunicate the Emperour
 from his Cathedrall seate: by the will of God the said Cathedrall seate, new made of strong
 board or plancke, did cracke and cleaue into many pieces or parts; to manifest how great and
 terrible Schismes had beene sowen against the Church of Christ, by an excommunication of so
 dangerous consequence, pronounced by the man that had sit Iudge therein . Now to bring
 and alleadge the example of such a man, who by attempting an act which neuer any man had the
 heart or face to attempt before, hath condemned all his predecessors of cowardise, or at least
 of ignorance, what is it else, but euen to send vs to the schoole of mightie robbers, and to
 seeke to correct and reforme ancient vertues by late vices ? Which Otho
 Frisingensis 
 
 calling into his owne priuate considera- tion, hee durst freely professe, that hee had not reade of any Emperour before this Henry the IIII.
 excommunicated or driuen out of his Imperiall Throne and King- dome by the chiefe Bishop of
 Rome . But if this quarrell may be tryed and fought out with weapons of examples, I leaue
 any indifferent reader to iudge what ex- amples ought in the cause to be of chiefest authority
 and weight; whether late examples of Kings deposed by Popes, for the most part neuer taking
 the intended effect; or auncient examples of Popes actually and effectually thrust out of
 their thrones by Emperours and Kings. 
 The Emperour Constantius expelled Liberius 
 Bishop of Rome out of the citie: banished him as farre as Beroe , and
 placed Foelix in his roome. Indeed Con- stantius was an Arrian, and
 therein vsed no lesse impious then vniust proceeding, Neuerthelesse, the auncient Fathers of
 the Church, doe not blame Constantius for his hard and sharpe dealing
 with a chiefe Bishop, ouer whom hee had no law- full power, but onely as an enemie to the
 Orthodoxe faith, and one that raged with extreame rigour of persecution against innocent
 beleeuers. 
 In the raigne of Valentinian the I. 4 and yeare of the Lord 367. the contention betweene Damasus and Vrcisinus competitors for the Bishopricke, filled
 the citie of Rome with a bloody sedition, in which were wickedly and cruelly murdered 137.
 persons. To meet with such turbulent actions, Honorius made a law
 extant in the Decreetalls, 5 the
 words whereof be these; If it shall happen henceforth by the temeritie of
 competitors, that any two Bishops be elected to the See, we straitly 
 
 charge and command that neither of both shall sit in the said See . By
 vertue of this Law, the same Honorius in the yeare 420. expelled Bonifacius and Eulalius , com- petitors and Antipopes out of Rome, though not
 long after he reuoked Bonifacius and setled him in the Papall See. Theodoric the Goth King of Italy, sent Iohn Bishop
 of Rome Embassador to the Emperour Iustinian, called him home againe, and clapt him vp in the
 close prison, where he starved to death. By the same King, Peter Bishop
 of Altine was dispatched to Rome, to heare the cause and examine the processe of Pope Symmachus , then indited and accused of sundry crimes. 
 
 King Theodatus about the yeare 537. had the seruice of Pope Agapetus , as his Embassadour to the Emperour Iustinian , vpon a treatie of peace. Agapetus dying in the time
 of that seruice, Syluerius is made Bishop by Theodatus . Not long after, Syluerius is driuen out by Belisarius the Emperour his Lieutenant, and sent into banishment. After
 Syluerius next succeedeth Vigilius , who with
 cur- rant coine purchased the Popedome of Belisarius . The Emperour
 Iustinian sends for Vigilius to Constantinpole, and receiues him there
 with great honour. Soone after, the Emperour takes offence at his freenesse in speaking his
 mind, commands him to bee beaten with stripes in manner to death, and with a roape about his
 necke to be drawne through the city like a thiefe, as Platina relates
 the historie. Nicephorus in his 26. booke, and 17. chapter, comes very
 neere the same relation. 
 
 The Emperour Constantius , in the yeere 654. caused Pope Martin to be bound with chaines, and banished him into Chersonesus, where
 he ended his life. The Popes in that aage writing to the Emperours, vsed none but submissiue
 tearmes, by way of most humble supplications; made profession of bowing the knee be- fore
 their sacred Maiesties, and of executing their commaunds with entire obedi- ence; payed to the
 Emperours twenty pound weight of gold for their Inuestiture; which tribute was afterward
 released and remitted, by Constantine the Bearded, to Pope Agatho , in the yeere 679. as I haue obserued in
 an other place. 
 
 Nay further, euen when the power and riches of the Popes was growne to great height, by the
 most profuse and immense munificence of Charlemayne and Lewis his
 sonne; the Emperours of the West did not relinquish and giue ouer the making and vnmaking of
 Popes, as they saw cause. Pope Adrian I . willingly submitted his necke
 to this yoke: and made this Law to be passed in a Councill, that in Charlemayne should rest a right and power for the Popes election, and for the
 gouernement of the Papall See. This Constitution is incerted in the De-
 cretals , Distinct. 63. Can. 
 Hadrianus , and was confirmed by the practise of many yeeres. 
 
 In the yeere of the Lord 963. the Emperour Otho tooke away the
 Popedome from Iohn 13. and placed Leo 8. in his
 roume. In like maner, Iohn 14. Gregory 5. and Siluester 2. were seated in the Papall Throne by the Othos. 
 
 The Emperour Henrie 2. in the yeere 1007. deposed three Popes,
 namely, Bendict 9. Siluester 3. and Gregorie 6.
 whom Platina doeth not sticke to call, three most detestable and vile
 monsters. This custome continued, this practise stood in force for diuers
 aages, euen vntill the times of Gregorie 7. by whom the whole West was
 tossed and turmoiled with lamentable warres, which plagued the world, and the Empire by name
 with intolerable troubles and mischiefes. For after the said Gregorian 
 warres, the Empire fell from bad to worse, and so went on to decay, till Emperours at last
 were driuen to beg, and receiue the Imperiall Crowne of the Pope. 
 The Kingdome of France met not with so rude entreatie, but was dealt
 withall by courses of a milder temper. Gregorie 4. about the yeere of
 the Lord, 832, was the first Pope that perswaded himselfe to vse the censure of
 Excommunication against a King of France . This Pope hauing a hand in
 the troublesome factions of the Realme, was nothing backward to side with the sonnes of Lewis surnamed the Courteous, by wicked conspiracie entring into a
 desperate course and complot against Lewis their owne father; as
 witnesseth Sigebert in these words, Pope 
 Gregorie comming into France, ioyned himselfe to the
 sonnes against the Emperour their Father . But Annals of the very same times, and hee
 that furbushed Aimo- nius , a Religious of S. Benedicts Order, doe testifie, that all the Bishops of France 
 fell vpon this resolution; by no means to rest in the Popes pleasure, or to giue any place
 vnto his designe: and contrariwise, In case the Pope should proceed to
 Excommunication of their King, hee should returne out of France to Rome an ex- communicate person himselfe . The Chronicle of S.
 Denis hath words in this forme: The Lord
 Apostolicall returned answere, that hee was not come into France, for
 any other purpose, but onely to excommunicate the King and his Bishops, if they would bee in
 any sort opposite vnto the sonnes of Lewis, or disobedient vnto the
 will and pleasure of his Holinesse: The Prelates enformed heereof, made answere, that in this
 case they would neuer yeeld obedience to the Excommiuncation of the said Bishops; because it
 was contrary to the authoritie and aduise of the ancient Canons. 
 
 After these times, Pope Nicolas I . depriued King Lotharius of Communion (for in those times not a word of deposing) to make him
 repudiate or quit Val- drada , and to resume or take againe Thetherga his former wife. The Articles framed by the French vpon this
 point, are to bee found in the writing of Hincma- rus , Archibishop of
 Reims , and are of this purport; that in the iudgement of men both
 learned and wise, it is an ouerruled case, that as the King whatsoeuer hee shall doe, ought
 not by his owne Bishops to be excommunicated, euen so no for- reine Bishop hath power to sit
 for his Iudge: because the King is to be subject onely vnto God, and his Imperiall authoritie,
 who alone had the all-sufficient power to settle him in his Kingdome. Moreouer,
 the Clergie addressed letters of answere vnto the same Pope, full of stinging and bitter
 termes, with speaches of great scorne and contempt, as they are set downe by Auentine , in his Annals
 of Bauaria , not forbearing to call him thiefe, wolfe,
 and tyrant. 
 
 When Pope Hadrian tooke vpon him like a Lord, to command Charles the Bald vpon paine of interdiction, that hee should suffer the
 Kingdome of Lotharius to bee fully and entirely conueyed and conferred
 vpon Lewis his sonne; the same Hincmarus , a man
 of great authoritie and estimation in that aage, sent his letters conteining sundry
 remonstrances touching that subject: Among other matters thus he writeth, The Ecclesiastics and Seculars of the Kingdome assembled at Reims, haue affirmed and now doe affirme by way of reproach, vpbraiding, and ex- probation, that
 neuer was the like Mandate sent before from the See of Rome to any of
 our predecessours . And a little after: The chiefe Bishops of the
 Apostolike See, or any other Bishops of the greatest authoritie and holinesse, neuer withdrew
 them- selues from the presence, from the reuerend salutation, or from the conference of
 Emperours and Kings, whether Heretikes, or Schismatikes and Tyrants: as Con- stantius
 the Arrian , Iulianus the Apostata, and Maximus
 the Tyrant . And yet a little after; Wherefore if the
 Apostolike Lord bee minded to seeke peace, let him seeke it so, that he stirre no brawles,
 and breed no quarrels: For we are no such babes to beleeue, that we can or euer shall attaine
 to Gods Kingdome, unlesse wee receiue him for our King in earth, whom God himself
 recommendeth to vs from heauen . It is added by Hincmarus in the
 same place, that by the said Bishops and Lords Tem- porall, such threatning words were blowen
 forth, as hee is afraid once to speake and vtter. As for the King himselfe, what reckoning hee
 made of the Popes mandates, it appeareth by the Kings owne letters addressed to Pope Hadrianus, as we may reade euery where in the Epistles of Hincmarus . For there, after King Charles hath taxed
 and challenged the Pope of pride, and hit him in the teeth with a spirit of vsurpation, hee
 breaketh out into these words: What Hell hath cast vp this law so crosse and
 preposterous ? what infernal gulph hath disgorged this law out of the darkest and obscurest
 dennes ? a law quite contrary, and altogether repugnant vnto the beaten way shewed vs in the
 holy Scriptures, &c . Yea, he flatly and peremptorily forbids the Pope, except he
 meane or desire to be recompensed with dishonour and contempt, to send any more the like
 Mandates, either to himselfe, or to his Bishops. 
 Vnder the reigne of Hugo Capetus and Robert 
 his sonne, a Councell now extant in all mens hands, was held and celebrated at Reims by the Kings authoritie. There Arnulphus 
 Bishop of Orleans , then Prolocutor and Speaker of the Councel, calls
 the Pope Antichrist, and lets not also to paint him forth like a monster: as well for the
 deformed and vgly vices of that vnholy See, which then were in their exaltation, as also
 because the Pope then wonne with presents, and namely with certaine goodly horses, then
 presented to his Holinesse, tooke part against the King, with Arnulphus Bishop of Reims , then dispossessed of his Pastorall
 charge. 
 When Philip I . had repudiated his wife Bertha ,
 daughter to the Earle of Hol- land ; and in her place had also taken to
 wife Bertrade the wife of Fulco Earle of Aniou yet being aliue; hee was excommunicated, and his Kingdome
 interdicted by Vrbanus then Pope, (though he was then bearded with an
 Antipope) as the L. Cardinal here giueth vs to vnderstand. But his Lordship hath skipt ouer
 two principall points recorded in the historie. The first is, that Philip , was not de- posed by the Pope: whereupon it is to be inferred, that in this
 passage there is nothing materiall to make for the Popes power against a Kings Throne and
 Scep- ter. The other point is, that by the censures of the Pope, the course of obedience due
 to the King before was not interrupted, nor the King disauowed, refused, or disclaimed: but on
 the contrary, that Iuo of Charytres taking Pope
 Vrbanus part, was punished for his presumption, dispoyled of his
 estate, and kept in prison: whereof he makes complaint himselfe in his 19. and 20. Epistles.
 The L. Cardinall besides, in my vnderstanding for his Masters honour, should haue made no
 words of interdicting the whole Kingdome. For when the Pope, to giue a King chastise- ment,
 doeth interdict his Kingdome, hee makes the people to beare the punish- ment of the Kings
 offence: For during the time of interdiction, the Church doores through the whole Kingdome are
 kept continually shut and lockt vp: publike service is intermitted in all places: bels euery
 where silent: Sacraments not ad- ministred to the people: bodies of the dead so prostituted
 and abandoned, that none dares burie the said bodies in holy ground. More, it is beleeued,
 that a man dying vnder the curse of the interdict (without some speciall indulgence or priui-
 ledge) is for euer damned and adiudged to eternall punishments, as one that dyeth out of the
 communion of the Church. Put case then the interdict holdeth and continueth for many yeares
 together; alas, how many millions of poore soules are damned, and goe to hell for an others
 offence ? For what can, or what may the faltlesse and innocent people doe withall, if the King
 will repudiate his wife, and she yet liuing, ioyne himselfe in matrimonie to an other ? 
 The Lord Cardinall after Philip the I. produceth Philippus Augustus , who hauing
 renounced his wife Ingeberga daughter to the King of Denmarke , and marrying with Agnes daughter to the Duke of Morauia , was by Pope Innocent the third interdicted himselfe and his whole
 Kingdome. But his Lordshippe was not pleased to insert withall, what is auerred in the
 Chronicle of Saint Denis: that Pope Caelestinus 
 3. sent forth two Legats at once vpon this errand: 
 Who being come into the assemblie and generall Council of all the French
 Prelats, became like dumbe dogs that can not barke, so as they could not bring the seruice
 which they had undertaken to any good passe, because they stood in a bodily feare of their
 owne hydes. Not long after, the Cardinall of Capua was in the like taking: For hee durst nor
 bring the Realme within the limits of the interdict, before hee was got out of the 
 
 limits of the Kingdome. The King herewith incensed, thrust all the Prelates
 that had giuen consent vnto these proceedings out of their Sees, confiscated their goods,
 &c. To the same effect is that which wee reade in Matthew
 Paris . After the Pope had giuen his Maiestie to vnderstand by the Cardinal of Anagnia , that his kingdome should be interdicted, vnlesse he would be
 reconciled to the King of England; the King returned the Pope this answere, that he was not in
 any sort afraid of the Popes sentence, for as much as it could not be grounded vpon any
 equitie of the cause: and added withall, that it did no way appertaine vnto
 the Church of Rome to sentence Kings, especially the King of France . And this was done,
 saith Iohannes Tilius Register in Court of Parliament of Paris, by the counsell of the French Barons. 
 
 Most notable is the example of Philip the faire , and hits the bird in
 the right eye. In the yeere 1032. the Pope dispatched the Archbishop of Narbona with mandates into France, commanding the King to
 release the Bishop of Apamia then detained in prison, for contumelious
 words tending to the Kings defamation, and spoken to the Kings owne head. In very deed this
 Pope had conceiued a secret grudge, and no light displeasure against King Philip before: namely, be- cause the King had taken vpon him the collation of
 Benefices, and other Eccle- siastical dignities. Vpon which occasion the Pope sent letters to
 the King of this tenour and style: Feare God, and keepe his Commandements:
 Wee would haue thee know, that in Spirituall and Temporall causes thou art subiect vnto our
 selfe: that collating of Benefices and Prebends, doeth not in any sort appertaine to thy
 office and place: that, in case as keeper of the Spiritualties, thou haue the custodie of
 Benefices and Prebends in thy hand when they become voyd, thou shalt by sequestra- tion
 reserue the fruits of the same, to the vse and benefit of the next Incumbents and successors:
 and in case thou hast heretofore collated any, we ordaine the said colla- tions to be meerely
 void: and so farre as herein thou hast proceeded to the fact, we reuoke the said collations.
 We hold them for hereticks whosoeuer are not of this beliefe . A Legate comes to Paris,
 and brings these brauing letters: By some of the Kings faithfull seruants they are violently
 snatched and pulled out of the Legates hands: by the Earle of Artois they are cast into the
 fire. The good King answeres the Pope, and payes him in as good coyne as he had sent. Philip by the grace of God King of the French, to Boniface calling and bearing himselfe the Soueraigne Bishop, little greeting or none at
 all. May thy exceeding sottishnesse vnderstand, that in Temporall causes we are not subiect
 vnto any mortall and earthly creature: that collating of Benefices and Prebends, by Regall
 right appertaineth to our office and place: that appropriating their fruits when they become
 void, belongeth to our selfe alone during their vacancie: that all collations by vs
 heretofore made, or to bee made hereafter, shall stand in force: that in the validitie and
 vertue of the said collations, wee will euer couragiously defend and maintaine, all
 Incumbents and possessors of Benefices and Prebends so by vs collated. We hold them all for
 sots and senselesse, whosoeuer are not of this beliefe . The Pope incensed herewith,
 excom- municates the King: but no man dares publish that censure, or become
 bearer thereof. The King notwithstanding the said proceedings of the Pope, assembles his
 Prelates, Barons, and Knights at Paris: askes the whole assembly, of whom they hold their
 Fees, with al other the Temporalties of the Church. They make answere with one voice, that in
 the said matters they disclaime the Pope, and know none other Lord beside his Maiestie. Meane
 while the Pope worketh with Germainie and the Low Countreis, to stirre them vp against France.
 But Philip sendeth William of Nogaret into Italy. William by the direction and aide of Sciarra Columnensis , takes the Pope at Anagnia ,
 mounts him vpon a leane ill- fauoured iade, caries him prisoner to Rome; where ouercome with
 choller, anguish and great indignation, he takes his last leaue of the Popedome and his life.
 All this notwithstanding, the King presently after, from the successours of Boniface receiues very ample and gratious Bulls, in which the memorie of all the former
 passages and actions is vtterly abolished. Witnesse the Epistle of Clement
 5. wherein this King is
 honoured with praises, for a pious and religious Prince, and his Kingdome is restored to the
 former estate. In that aage the French Nobilitie caried other maner of spirits, then the
 moderne and present Nobilitie doe: I meane those by whom the L. Cardinal was applauded and
 assisted in his Oration. Yea, in those former times the Prelates of the Realme stood better
 affected towards their King, then the L. Cardinal himselfe now standeth: who could finde none
 other way to daily with, and to shift off this pregnant example, but by plaine glosing, that
 heresie and Apostasie was no ground of that question, or subiect of that controuersie. Wherein
 hee not onely condemnes the Pope, as one that proceeded against Philip 
 without a iust cause & good ground, but likewise giues the Pope the Lie, who in his goodly
 letters but a little aboue recited, hath enrowled Philip , in the list
 of heretiques. Hee saith moreouer, that indeed the knot of the question was touching the Popes
 pretence, in challenging to himselfe the temporall Soueraigntie of France, that is to say, in
 qualifying himselfe King of France: But indeed and indeed no such matter to be found. His
 whole pre- tence was the collating of Benefices, and to pearch aboue the King, to crow ouer
 his Crowne in Temporall causes. At which pretence his Holinesse yet aimeth, still attributing
 and challenging to himselfe plenarie power to depose the King. Now if the L. Cardinal shall
 yet proceed to cauill, that Boniface the eighth was taken by the French
 for an vsurper, and no lawfull Pope, but for one that crept into the Papacie by fraud and
 symonie; he must be pleased to set downe positiuely who was Pope, seeing that Boniface then sate not in the Papall chaire. To conclude, If hee that
 creepeth and stealeth into the Papacie by symonie, by canuases or labouring of suffrages vnder
 hand, or by bribery, be not lawfull Pope; I dare be bold to professe, there will hardly be
 found two lawfull Popes in the three last aages. 
 
 Pope Benedict in the yeere 1408. being in choller with Charles the sixt, be- cause Charles had bridled and curbed the
 gainefull exactions and extorsions of the Popes Court, by which the Realme of France had bene
 exhausted of their treasure, sent an excommunicatorie Bull into France, against Charles the King, and all his Princes. The Vnuiersitie of Paris made
 request or motion that his Bull might be mangled, and Pope Benedict 
 himselfe, by some called Petrus de Luna , might be declared heretike, schismatike, and perturber of the peace . The said Bull was mangled and rent in pieces, according to the petition of the
 Vniuersitie, by Decree of Court vpon the tenth of Iune, 1408. Tenne dayes after, the Court
 rising at eleuen in the morning, two Bul-bearers of the said excommunicatorie censure
 vnderwent ignominious punishment vpon the Palace or great Hal staires. From thence were led to
 the Louure in such maner as they had bene brought from thence before:
 drawne in two tumbrels, clad in coates of painted linnen, wore paper-mytres on their heads,
 were proclaimed with sound of Trumpet, and euery where disgraced with publike derision: So
 litle reckoning was made of the Popes thundering canons in those dayes. And what would they
 haue done, if the said Buls had imported sentence of deposition against King Charles? 
 
 The French Church assembled at Tours in the yeere 1510. decreed that
 Lewis XII. might with safe conscience contemne the
 abusiue Bulls, and vniust censures of Pope Iulius the II. and by
 armes might withstand the Popes vsurpations, in case hee should proceed to excommunicate or
 depose the King. More, by a Councill holden at Pisa , this Lewis declared the Pope to bee fallen from the Pope- dome, and coyned
 crownes with a stampe of this inscription, I will destroy the name of
 Babylon . To this the L. of Perron makes answere, that all this
 was done by the French, as acknowledging these iars to haue sprung not from the fountaine of
 Religion, but from passion of state. Wherein he condemneth Pope Iulius ,
 for gluing so great scope vnto his publike censures, as to serue his ambition, and not rather
 to aduance Religion. He secretly teacheth vs besides, that when the Pope vndertakes to depose
 the King of France, then the French are to sit as Iudges concerning the lawfulnesse or
 vnlawfulnesse of the cause; and in case they shall finde the cause to be vnlawfull, then to
 disanull his iudgements, and to scoffe at his thunderbolts. Iohn
 d'Albret King of Nauarre, whose Realme was giuen by the foresaid Pope to Ferdinand King of Arragon, was also wrapped and entangled with strict
 bands of deposition. Now if the French had bene touched with no better feeling of affection to
 their King, then the subiects of Nauarre were to the Nauarrois; doubtlesse France had sought a
 new Lord, by vertue of the Popes (as the L. Car- dinall himselfe doeth acknowledge and
 confesse) vniust sentence. But behold, to make the said sentence against Iohn d'Albret seeme the lesse contrary to equitie, the L. Cardinall
 pretends, the Popes donation was not indeed the principall cause, howsoeuer Ferdinand himselfe made it his
 pretence. But his Lo. giues this for the principall cause: that Iohn d'Albret had quitted his alliance made with con- dition; that in case the Kings of
 Nauarre should infringe the said alliance, and breake the league, then the kingdome of Nauarre
 should returne to the Crowne of Arragon. This condition, betweene Kings neuer made, and
 without all shew of probabilitie, serueth to none other purpose from the Cardinals mouth, but
 onely to insinuate and worke a perswasion in his King, that he hath no right nor lawfull
 pretension to the Crowne of Nauarre: and whatsoeuer hee now holdeth in the said kingdome of
 Nauarre, is none of his owne, but by vsurpation and vn- lawfull possession. Thus his Lordship
 French-borne, makes himselfe an Aduo- cate for the Spanish King, against his owne King, and
 King of the French: who shalbe faine, as hee ought (if this Aduocats plea may take place) to
 draw his title and style of King of Nauarre out of his Royall titles, and to acknowledge that
 all the great endeuours of his predecessors to recouer the said Kingdome, were dis- honourable
 and vniust. Is it possible, that in the very heart and head Citie of France, a spirit and
 tongue so licentious can be brooked ? What, shall so great blasphemie (as it were) of the
 Kings freehold, bee powred foorth in so honourable an assembly, without punishment or fine ?
 What, without any contradiction for the Kings right, and on the Kings behalfe ? I may perhaps
 confesse the indignitie might bee the better borne, and the pretence alledged might passe for
 a poore excuse, if it serued his purpose neuer so little. For how doeth all this touch or come
 neere the question ? in which the Popes vsurpation in the deposing of Kings, and the
 resolution of the French in resisting this tyrannicall practise, is the proper issue of the
 cause: both which points are neuer a whit more of the lesse consequence and inportance,
 howsoeuer Ferdinand in his owne iustification stood vpon the foresaid
 pretence. Thus much is confessed, and wee aske no more: Pope Iulius 
 tooke the Kingdome from the one, and gaue it vnto the other: the French thereupon resisted the
 Pope, and declared him to be fallen from the Papacie. 
 This noble spirit and courage of the French, in maintayning the dignitie and honour of their
 Kings Crownes, bred those ancient customes, which in the se- quence of many aages haue bene
 obserued and kept in vse. This for one: That no Legate of the Pope, nor any of his rescripts
 nor mandates , are admitted and receiued in France, without licence from the King : and vnlesse the Legate impart his faculties to the Kings
 Atturney Generall, to be perused and verified in Court of Parliament: where they are to be
 tyed by certaine modifications and restrictions, vnto such points as are not derogatorie from
 the Kings right, from the liberties of the Church, and from the ordinances of the Kingdome.
 When Cardinal Balua , contrary to this ancient forme, entred France in the yeere 1484. and there
 without leaue of the King did execute the office, & speed certaine Acts of
 the Popes Legate; the Court vpon motion made by the Kings Atturney Generall, decreed a
 Commission, to be informed against him by two Councellors of the the said Court, and inhibited
 his further proceeding to vse any facultie or power of the Popes Legate, vpon paine of beeing
 proclamied rebell. 
 In the yeere 1561. Iohannes Tanquerellus Batchelour in Diuinitie, by
 order of the Court was condemned to make open confession, that hee had indiscreetly and rashly without consideration defended this proposition, The Pope is
 the Vicar of Christ, a Monarke that hath power both Spirituall and Secular, and he may
 depriue Princes, which rebell against his commandements, of their dignities . Which pro-
 position, howsoeuer he protested that he had propounded the same onely to be
 argued, and not iudicially to be determined in the affirmatiue, Tanquerellus 
 neuer- thelesse was compelled openly to recant. Here the L. Cardinall answeres; The historie
 of Tanquerellus is from the matter, because his proposition treateth
 neither of Heresie nor of Infidelitie: but I answere, The said proposition treateth of both,
 forasmuch as it maketh mention of disobedience to the Pope. For I suppose hee will not denie,
 that whosoeuer shall stand out in Heresie, contrary to the Popes monitorie proceedings, he
 shal shew but poore and simple obedience to the Pope. Moreouer, the case is cleare by the
 former examples, that no Pope will suffer his power to cast downe Kings, to be restrained vnto
 the cause of Heresie and Infidelitie. 
 In the heate of the last warres, raised by that holy-prophane League, admoni- tory Bulls
 were sent by Pope Gregorie 14. from Rome , Anno
 1591. By these Bulls King Henrie 4. as an Heretike and relapse, was
 declared incapable of the Crowne of France , and his Kingdome was
 exposed to hauocke and spoile. The Court of Parliament being assembled at Tours the 5. of August, decreed the said admoni- torie Bulls to bee cancelled, torne in
 pieces, and cast into a great fire by the hand of the publike executioner. The Arrest it selfe
 or Decree is of this tenour: The Court duely pondering and approoying the
 concluding and unanswerable reasons of Kings Attorney Generall, hath declared, and by these
 present doeth declare, the ad- monitorie Bulls giuen at Rome the 1. of
 March 1591. to be of no validitie, abusiue, seditious, damnable, full of impietie and
 impostures, contrary to the holy decrees, rights, franchises, and liberties of the French
 Church: doeth ordeine the Copies of the said Bulls, sealed with the
 seale of Marsilius Landrianus, and signed Septilius Lamprius, to bee rent in pieces by the publike executioner, and by him to be burnt in a
 great fire to be made for such purpose, before the great gates of the common Hall or Palace,
 &c . Then, euen then the L. of Perron was firme for the better
 part, and stood for his King against Gregorie the Pope, notwithstanding
 the crime of heresie pretended against Henrie his Lord. 
 All the former examples by vs alledged, are drawen out of the times after Schooles of
 Diuinitie were established in France : For I thought good to bound my
 selfe within those dooles and limits of time, which the L. Cardinal himselfe
 hath set. Who goeth not sincerely to worke and in good earnest, where he telleth vs there be
 three instances (as if wee had no more) obiected against Papall power, to remooue Kings out of
 their chaires of State: by name, the example of Philip the Faire, of Lewis
 XII. and of Tanquerellus: For in very trewth all the former examples by
 vs produced, are no lesse pregnant and euident, howsoeuer the L. Cardinall hath bene pleased
 to conceale them all for feare of hurting his cause. 
 Nay, France euen in the dayes of her sorest seruitude, was neuer
 vnfurnished of great Diuines, by whom this vsurped power of the Pope, ouer the Temporalties
 and Crownes of Kings, hath beene vtterly misliked and condemned. Robert 
 Earle of Flanders was commanded by Pope Paschal 
 . to persecute with fire
 and sword the Clergie of Liege , who then adhered and stood to the cause
 of the Emperour Henrie 4. whom the Pope had ignominiously deposed. Robert by the Popes order and command, was to handle the Clergie of Liege in like sort as before hee had serued the Clergie of Cambray , who by the said Earle had beene cruelly stript both of goods and
 life: The Pope promised the said Earle and his army pardon of their sinnes for the said
 execution. The Clergie of Liege addressed answere to the Pope at large:
 They cried out vpon the Church of Rome , and called her Babylon : Told the Pope home, that God had commanded to giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars : that euery soule must
 bee subiect vnto the superiour powers: that no man is exempted out of this precept: and that
 euery oath of alleagiance is to be kept inuiolable; yea, that hereof they themselues are not
 ignorant, in as much as they by a new Schisme, and new traditions, making a separation and
 rent of the Priesthood from the Kingdome, doe promise to absolue of periurie, such as haue
 perfidiously forsworne themselues against their King. And whereas by way of despight and in
 opprobrious maner, they were excom- municated by the Pope, they gaue his Holinesse to
 vnderstand, that Dauids heart had vttered a good matter, but Paschals
 heart had spewed vp sordid and railing words, like old bawdes and spinsters
 or websters of linnen, when they scold and brawle one with another . Finally, they
 reiected his Papal excommunication, as a sentence giuen without discretion. This was the voyce
 and free speach of that Clergie, in the life time of their noble Emperour: But after hee was
 thrust out of the Em- pire by the rebellion of his owne sonne, instigated and stirred vp
 thereunto by the Popes perswasion and practise, and was brought vnto a miserable death; it is
 no matter of wonder, that for the safegard of their life, the said Clergie were driuen to sue
 vnto the Pope for their pardon. Hildebert 2 Bishop of Caenomanum vpon the riuer of Sartre , liuing vnder the reigne of
 King Philip the first, affirmeth in his Epistles 40. and 75. that Kings are to bee admonished and instructed, rather then punished: to be dealt
 with by counsell rather then by command, by doctrine and instruction, rather then by
 correction: For no such sword belongeth to the Church, because the sword of the Church is
 Ec- 
 
 clesisticall discipline, and nothing else. Bernard writeth to Pope Eugenius after this manner: Whosoeuer they bee that are of this mind
 and opinion, shall neuer be able to make proofe, that anyone of the Apostles did euer sit in
 qualitie of Iudge or Diuider of lands. I reade where they haue stood to bee iudged, but neuer
 where they sate downe to giue iudgement . Againe, Your authoritie
 stretcheth vnto crimes, not vnto possessions: because you haue receiued the keies of the
 kingdome of heauen, not in regard of possessions, but of crimes, to keepe all that pleade by
 couin or collu- sion, and not lawfull possessors, out of the heauenly kingdome . A little
 after: These base things of the earth are iudged by the Kings and Princes of
 this world: wherefore doe you thrust your sickle into an others haruest? wherefore doe you
 incroach and intrude vpon an others limits ? Elsewhere: The Apostles
 are directly forbid to make themselues Lords and rulers. Goe thou then, and beeing a Lord
 vsurpe Apostleship, or beeing an Apostle vsurpe Lordship. If thou needs wilt haue both,
 doubtlesse thou shalt haue neither. 
 
 Iohannes Maior Doctor of Paris: The Soueraugne Bishop hath no
 temporall authoritie ouer Kings. The reason: Because it followes (the contrarie being once
 granted) that Kings are the Popes vassals . Now let other men iudge, whether he that hath
 power to dispossesse Kings of all their Temporalties, hath not like- wise authoritie ouer
 their Temporalties. 
 The same Author: 
 The Pope hath no manner of title ouer the French or Spanish Kings in
 temporall matters . Where it is further added, That Pope Innocent
 3. hath beene pleased to testifie, that Kings of France in
 Temporall causes doe acknowledge no superiour: For so the Pope excused himselfe to a certaine
 Lord of Montpellier, who in stead of suing to the King, had petitioned to the Pope for a
 dispensation for his bastard. But perhaps (as he speaketh) it will be
 alledged out of the glosse, that hee acknowledgeth no superiour by fact, and yet ought by
 right. But I tell you the glosse is an Aurelian glosse, which marres the text . Amongst
 other arguments, Maior brings this for one: This
 opinion ministreth matter vnto Popes, to take away an others Empire by force and violence:
 which the Pope shall neuer bring to passe, as we reade of Boniface 8. against Philip the Faire: Saith besides, That from hence proceede
 warres, in time of which many outragious mischiefes are done, and that Gerson calls them egregious flatterers by whom such opinion is main- tained . In
 the same place Maior denies that Childeric was
 deposed by Pope Zacharie: The word, Hee deposed, saith Maior, is not so to bee understood, as it is taken at the first blush or sight; but
 hee deposed, is thus expounded in the glosse, Hee gaue his consent vnto those by whom he was
 deposed. 
 
 Iohn of Paris: 
 Were it graunted that Christ was armed with Temporall power, yet he
 committed no such power to Peter . A little after: The power of Kings
 is the highest power vpon earth: in Temporall causes it hath no superiour power aboue it
 selfe, no more then the Pope hath in spirituall matters . This author saith indeede, the Pope hath power to excommunicate the King; but he speaketh not of any power in
 the Pope to put downe the King from his regall dignity and authority: He onely saith, When a
 Prince is once excommunicated, hee may accidentally or by occasion be deposed: because his
 precedent excommunication, incites the people to disarme him of all secular dignity and power.
 The same Iohn on the other side holdeth opinion; that in the Emperour there
 is inuested a power to de- pose the Pope, in case the Pope shall abuse his power. 
 
 Almainus Doctor of the Sorbonic 
 schoole: It is essentiall in the Lay-power to inflict ciuill punishment, as
 death, banishment, and priuation or losse of goods. But according to diuine institution, the
 power Ecclesiasticall can lay no such punish- ment vpon delinquents: nay more, not lay in
 prison, as to some Doctors it seemeth probable: but stretcheth and reacheth onely to
 spirituall punishment, as namely to excommunication: all other punishments inflicted by the
 spirituall power, are meerely by the Lawe positiue . If then Ecclesiasticall power by Gods
 Lawe hath no au- thoritie to depriue any priuate man of his goods; how dares the Pope and his
 flatterers build their power to depriue Kings of their scepters vpon the word of God ? 
 The same author in an other place: 
 Bee it graunted that Constantine had power to giue
 the Empire vnto the Pope; yet is it not hereupon to bee inferred, that Popes haue authority
 ouer the Kingdome of France, because that Kingdome was neuer subiect
 vnto Constantine: For the King of France neuer
 had any superiour in Tem- porall matters . A little after: It is not in
 any place to bee found, that God hath giuen the Pope power to make and vnmake Temporall
 Kings. 
 
 He maintaineth elsewhere, that Zacharie did not depose Childeric , but onely consented to his deposing; and so
 deposed him not as by authoritie . In the same booke, taking vp the words of Occam , whom he styles the
 Doctor: The Em- perour is the Popes Lord in things Temporall, and the Pope
 calls him Lord, as it is witnessed in the body of the Text . The Lord Cardinall hath dissembled and con-
 cealed these words of Doctor Almainus , with many like places: and hath
 beene pleased to alledge Almainus reciting Occams authoritie, in stead of quoting Al- mainus himselfe in
 those passages, where he speaketh as out of his owne opinion, and in his owne words. A notable
 piece of slie and cunning conueiance: For what heresie may not be fathered and fastened vpon
 S. Augustine , or S. Hierome, if they should be
 deemed to approoue all the passages which they alledge out of other authors ? And that is the
 reason wherefore the L. Cardinall doeth not al- ledge his testimonies whole and perfect, as
 they are couched in their proper texts, but clipt and curtaild. Thus he dealeth euen in the
 first passage or testimonie of 
 Almainus ; he brings it in mangled and pared: he hides and conceales the
 words added by Almainus , to contradict and crosse the words going
 before: For Al- mainus makes this addition and supply; Howsoeuer some other Doctors doe stand for the negatiue, and teach the Pope
 hath power onely to declare that Kings and Princes are to be deposed . And so much
 appeareth by this reason; because this ample and Soueraigne power of the Pope, might giue him
 occasion to be puft vp with great pride, and the same fulnesse of power might prooue extremely
 hurtfull to the subiects, &c. 
 The same Almainus 
 
 brings in Occams opinion in expresse tearmes deciding the question, and
 there ioynes his owne opinion with Occams. The Doctors opin- ion , saith
 Almainus, doeth simply carrie the most probabilitie; that a Pope hath no
 power, neither by excommunication, nor by any other meanes, to depose a Prince from his
 Imperiall and Royall dignitie . And a little before hauing maintained the Greeke Empire was neuer transported by
 the Pope to the Germaines, and that when the Pope crownes the Emperour, he doeth not giue him
 the Empire, no more then the Archbishop of Reims when he crownes the king of France, doth giue
 him the kingdome; he drawes this conclusion according to Occams 
 opinion: I denie that an Emperour is bound by oath to promise the Pope
 allegiance. On the other side, if the Pope hold any Temporall possessions, hee is bound to
 sweare alle- giance vnto the Emperour, and to pay him tribute . The said Occam alledged by Almainus doeth further auerre,
 that Iustinian was acknowledged by the Pope for his superiour in Temporall causes: for as much
 as diuers Lawes which the Pope is bound to keepe and obserue, were enacted by Iustinian ; as by name the Law of prescription for an hundred yeeres: which
 Law standeth yet in force against the Bishop of Rome. And to the end that all men may clearely
 see, how great distance there is betweene Occams opinion and the L.
 Cardinals, who to- wards the end of his Oration, exhorts his hearers at no hand to dissent
 from the Pope; take you here a view of Occams owne words, as they are
 alledged by Al- mainus: The Doctor assoyles the arguments of Pope Innocent, by
 which the Pope would prooue out of these words of CHRIST, Whatsoeuer
 thou shalt binde, &c. that fulnesse of power in Temporall matters, belongeth to the
 Soueraigne Bishop: For Innocent saith, Whatsoeuer, excepteth nothing:
 But Occam assoyles Innocents authoritie, as not
 onely false, but also hereticall; and saith withall, that many things are spoken by 
 Innocent, which by his leaue sauour and smell of heresie, &c. 
 
 The L. Cardinall with lesse fidelitie
 alledgeth two places out of Thomas his Summe. The first, in the second
 of his second, Quest. 10. Art. 10. in the body of the Article; In which place (let it bee
 narrowly examined) Thomas will easily bee found to speake, not of the
 subiection of beleeuing Subiects vnder Infidel Kings, as the Lord Cardinall pretendeth, but of
 beleeuing seruants that liue vnder Mas- ters, whether Iewes or Infidels: As when a Iew keepeth
 seruants which professe 
 Iesus Christ ; or as when some of the faithfull kept in Caesars house; who are not considered by Thomas as
 they were subiects of the Empire, but as they were seruants of the family. The other place is
 taken out of Quest. 1. and 2. Art. in the body of the article: where no such matter as the L.
 Cardinal alledgeth can be found. 
 With like fidelitie he taketh Gerson in hand: who indeed in his booke of Ec- clesiasticall power, and 12.
 Consider. doeth affirme, When the abuse of Secular power redoundeth to
 manifest impugning of the faith, and blaspheming of the Creator, then shall it not bee amisse
 to haue recourse vnto the last branch of this 12. Con- sider. where, in such case as
 aforesaid, a certaine regitiue, directiue, regulative, and ordainatiue authoritie is
 committed to the Ecclesiasticall power . His very words: which make no mention at all of
 deposing, or of any compulsiue power ouer Soueraigne Princes: For that forme of rule and
 gouernment whereof Gerson speaketh, is exercised by Ecclesiasticall
 censures and excommunications; not by losse of goods, of Kingdomes, or of Empires. This place
 then is wrested by the L. Cardinall to a contrary sense. Neither should his Lordship haue
 omitted, that Gerson , in the question of Kings subiection in Temporall
 matters, or of the dependance of their Crownes vpon the Popes power, excepteth alwayes the
 King of France: witnesse that which Gerson a little before the place
 alleadged by the Cardinall, hath plainely affirmed: Now since Peters
 time, saith Gerson, all Im- periall, Regall, and
 Secular power is not immediatly to draw vertue and strength from the Soueraigne Bishop: as in
 this maner the most Christian King of France hath no Superiour, nor acknowledgeth any such
 vpon the face of the earth . Now here need no great sharpenesse of wit for the searching
 out of this deepe mysterie; that if the Pope hath power to giue or take away Crowns for any
 cause or any pretended occasion whatsoeuer, the Crowne of France must needs depend vpon the
 Pope. 
 But for as much as we are now hit in with Gerson , we will examine the
 L. Cardi- nals allegations towards the end of his Oration, taken out of Gersons famous Oration made before Charles the 6.
 for the Vniuersitie of Paris: where he brings in Gerson to affirme, That killing a Tyrant is a sacrifice acceptable to God . But Gerson (let it be diligently noted) there speaketh not in his owne person:
 he there brings in sedition speaking the words: Of which wordes vttered by sedition, and other
 like speeches, you shall now heare what iudgement Gerson himselfe hath
 giuen. When sedition had spoken with such a furious voyce, I turned away my
 face as if I had bene smitten with death, to shew that I was not able to endure her madnesse
 any longer . And indeed when dissimulation on the one side, and sedition on the other,
 had suggested the deuises of two contrary extremes, hee brings foorth Discretion as a Iudge, keeping the meane betweene both extremes, and vttering those
 words which the L. Cardinall alledgeth against himselfe. If the head,
 (saith 
 Gerson) or some other member of the ciuill body, should grow
 to so desperate a passe, that it would gulpe and swallow downe the deadly poyson of tyrannie;
 euery member in his place, with all power possible for him to raise by expedient meanes, and
 such as might preuent a greater inconuenience, should set himselfe against so madde a
 purpose, and so deadly practise: For if the head be grieued with some light paine; it is not
 fit for the hand to smite the head: no that were but afoolish and a mad part: Nor is the hand
 forthwith to chop off or separate the head from the body, but rather to cure the head with
 good speach and other meanes, like a skilfull and wise Physitian: Yea nothing would be more
 cruel or more voyd of reason, then to seeke to stop the strong and violent streame of
 tyrannie by sedition . These words, me thinke, doe make very strongly and expresly
 against butchering euen of Tyrannical Kings. And whereas a little after the said passage, he
 teacheth to expell Tyrannie, he hath not a word of expelling the Tyrant, but onely of breaking
 and shaking off the yoke of Tyrannie. Yet for all that, he would not haue the remedies for the
 repressing of Tyrannie, to be fetcht from the Pope, who presumeth to degrade Kings, but from
 Philosophers, Lawyers, Diuines, and personages of good conuersation .
 It appeareth now by all that hath bin said before, that whereas Gerson 
 in the 7. Considerat. against Flatterers , doeth affirme: Whensoeuer the Prince doeth manifestly pursue and prosecute his naturall
 subiects, and shew himselfe obstinately bent with notorious iniustice, to vexe them of set
 purpose, and with full consent, so farre as to the fact; then this rule and law of Nature
 doeth take place, It is lawfull to resist and repell force by force; and the sentence of 
 Seneca, There is no sacrifice more acceptable to God, then a tyrant offered
 in sacrifice ; the words, doeth take place , are so to be
 vnderstood, as he speaketh in another passage, to wit, with or amongst seditious persons. Or
 else the words, doeth take place , doe onely signifie, is put in practise. And so Gerson there speaketh not as out of
 his owne iudgement. 
 His Lordship also should not haue balked and left out Sigebertus , who
 with more reason might haue passed for French, then Thomas and Occam , whom hee putteth vpon vs for French. Sigebertus in his Chronicle vpon the yeere 1088. speaking of the Emperours deposing by
 the Pope, hath words of this tenour: This Heresie was not crept out of the
 shell in those dayes, that his Priests, who hath said to the King Apostata, and maketh an hypocrite to rule for the sinnes of the people, should teach the
 people they owe no subiection vnto wicked Kings, nor any alleagiance, notwithstanding they
 haue taken the oath of alleagiance. 
 
 Now after the L. Cardinall hath coursed in this maner through the histories of the last
 aages (which in case they all made for his purpose, doe lacke the weight of authority) in
 stead of searching the will of God in the sacred Oracles of his word and standing vpon
 examples of the ancient Church; at last, leauing the troupe of his owne allegations, he
 betakes himselfe to the sharpening and rebating of the points of his aduersaries weapons. 
 For the purpose, he brings in his aduersaries, the champions of Kings Crownes, & makes
 them to speake out of his own mouth (for his Lordship saith it will be obiected)
 after this manner: 
 It may come to passe, that Popes either caried with passion, or misled by
 sinister information, may without iust cause fasten vpon Kings the imputation of heresie or
 apostasie . Then for King-deposers he frames this answere: That by
 heresie they vnderstand notorious heresie, and formerly condemned by sentence of the Church.
 Moreouer, in case the Pope hath erred in the fact, it is the Clergies part adhering to their
 King, to make remonstrances vnto the Pope, and to require the cause may be referred to the
 iudgement of afull Councel, the French Church then and there being present . Now in this
 answere, the L. Cardinall is of another mind then Bellarmine his
 brother Cardinall: For hee goes thus farre, That a Prince condemned by vniust sentence of the Pope, ought neuerthelesse
 to quit his Kingdome, and that his Pastors vniust sentence shall not redound to his detriment;
 prouided that hee giue way to the said sentence, and shew himselfe not refractarie, but stay
 the time in patience, vntil the holy Father shall renounce his error, and reuoke his foresaid
 vniust sentence. In which case these two material points are to be presupposed: The one, That
 he who now hath seized the kingdome of the Prince displaced, wil forthwith (if the Pope shall
 sollicit and intercede) returne the Kingdome to the hand of the late possessor: The other,
 That in the interim the Prince vniustly deposed, shall not need to
 feare the bloody murderers mercilesse blade and weapon. But on the other side, the Popes power
 of so large a size, as Bellarmine hath shaped, is no whit pleasing to
 the L. Cardi- nals eye. For in case the King should be vniustly deposed by the Pope not well informed , he is not of the minde the Kingdome should stoupe to
 the Popes behests, but will rather haue the Kingdome to deale by remonstrance, and to referre
 the cause unto the Council: Wherein he makes the Council to be of more absolute and supreme
 authority then the Pope; a straine to which the holy father will neuer lend his eare. And yet
 doubtlesse, the Council required in this case must be vniuersall; wherein the French, for so
 much as they stand firme for the King and his cause, can be no Iudges: and in that regard the
 L. Cardinal requireth onely the presence of the French Church. Who seeth not here into what
 pickle the French cause is brought by this meanes ? The Bishops of Italie forsooth, of Spaine , of Sicilie ,
 of Germanie , the subiects of Soueraignes many times at pro- fessed or
 priuie enemitie with France , shall haue the cause compremitted and
 referred to their iudgement, whether the Kingdome of France shall driue
 out her Kings, and shall kindle the flames of seditious troubles, in the very heart and bowels
 of the Realme. But is it not possible, that a King may lacke the loue of his owne subiects,
 and they taking the vantage of that occasion, may put him to his trumps in his owne Kingdome ?
 Is it not possible, that calumniations whereby a credulous Pope hath beene seduced, may in
 like maner deceiue some part of a credulous people ? Is it not possible that one part of the
 people may cleaue to the Popes Faction, another may hold and stand out for the Kings rightfull
 cause, and ciuill warres may be kindled by the splene of these two sides ? Is it not possible,
 that his Holinesse will not rest in the remonstrances of the French, and will
 no further pursue his cause ? And whereas now a dayes a Generall Councill cannot be held,
 except it be called and assembled by the Popes authority; is it credible, the Pope will take
 order for the conuocation of a Council, by whom he shall be iudged ? And how can the Pope be
 President in a Councill, where himselfe is the party impleaded ? and to whom the sifting of
 his owne sentence is referred, as it were to Committies, to examine whether it was denounced
 according to Law, or against Iustice ? But in the meane time, whilest all these remonstrances
 and addresses of the Council are on foot; behold, the Royall Maiestie of the King hangeth as
 it were by loose gimmals, and must stay the iudgement of the Council to whom it is referred.
 Well: what if the Councill should happe to be two or three yeeres in assembling, and to
 continue or hold eighteene yeeres, like the Councill of Trent ; should
 not poore France , I beseech you, be reduced to a very bad plight ?
 should she not be in a very wise and warme taking ? To be short; His Lordships whole speach
 for the vntying of this knot, not onely sur- mounteth possiblitie, but is stuft with
 ridiculous toyes. This I make manifest by his addition in the same passage. If the Pope deceiued in fact, shall rashly and vniustly declare the King to be an heretike;
 then the Popes declaration shall not be seconded with actual deposition, vnles the Realme
 shall consent vnto the Kings depos- ing . What needes any man to bee instructed in this
 doctrine ? Who doth not knowe, that a King, so long as he is vpheld and maintained in his
 Kingdome by his people, cannot actually and effectually be deposed from his Throne ? Hee that
 speaketh such language and phrase, in effect saith, and saith no more then this: A King is
 neuer depriued of his Crowne, so long as he can keepe his Crowne on his head: a King is neuer
 turned and stript naked, so long as he can keepe his cloathes on his backe: a King is neuer
 deposed, so long as he can make the stronger partie and side against his enemies: in briefe, a
 King is King, and shall still remaine King, so long as he can hold the possession of his
 Kingdome, and sit fast in his Chaire of Estate. Howbeit, let vs here by the way, take notice
 of these words vttered by his Lordship: Thatfor the deposing of a King, the
 consent of the people must be obtained : For by these words the people are exalted aboue
 the King, and are made the Iudges of the Kings deposing. 
 But here is yet a greater matter: For that Popes may erre in faith, it is ac- knowledged by
 Popes themselues: For some of them haue condemned Pope Honorius for a
 Monothelite: S. Hierome , and S. Hilarius , and S.
 Athanasius doe testifie, that Pope Liberius 
 started aside, and subscribed to Arrianisme : Pope Iohn 23. was condemned in the Councill of Constance , for
 maintaining there is neither hell not heauen: Diuerse other Popes haue been tainted with
 errour in faith. If therefore any Pope hereticall in himselfe, shall depose an Orthodoxe King
 for heresie; can it be imagined, that he which boasts himselfe to beare all 
 diuine and humane lawes in the priuy coffer or casket of his breast, will stoope to the remonstrances of the French, and vayle to the reasons which they
 shall pro- pound, though neuer so justifiable, and of neuer so great validitie ? And how can
 he, that may be infected with damnable heresie (when himselfe is not alwayes free from
 heresie) be a iudge of heresie in a King ? In this question some are of opinion, that as a
 man, the Pope may fall into error, but not as Pope. Very good: I demand then vpon the matter,
 wherefore the Pope doth not instruct and re- forme the man ? or wherefore the man doth not
 require the Popes instructions ? But whether a King be deposed by that man the Pope, or by
 that Pope the man, is it not all one ? is he not deposed ? Others affirme, the Pope may erre
 in a ques- tion of the fact, but not in a question of the right. An egregious gullery and im-
 posture: For if he may be ignorant whether Iesus Christ died for our sinnes, doubtles he may
 also be to seeke, whether we should repose all our trust and assured confidence in the death
 of Christ. Consider with me the Prophets of olde: They were all inspired and taught of God, to
 admonish and reprooue the Kings of Iudah and Israel: they neither erred in matter of fact, nor
 in point of right: they were as farre from being blinded and fetcht ouer by deceitfull calum-
 niations, as from beeing seduced by the painted shew of corrupt and false doctrine: As they
 neuer trode awry in matter of faith: so they neuer whetted the edge of their tongue or style
 against the faultlesse. Had it not beene a trimme deuice in their times, to say, that as Esay and as Daniel they might haue sunke into
 heresie, but not as Prophets ? For doubtlesse in this case, that Esay 
 would haue taken councell of the Prophet which was himselfe. To be short; If Kings are onely
 so long to be taken for Kings, vntill they shall be declared heretikes, and shall be deposed
 by the Pope; they continually stand in extreame danger, to vndergoe a very heauy and vniust
 sentence. Their safeth way were to know nothing, and to beleeue by proxie; least, if they
 should happen to talke of God, or to thinke of religion, they should be drawne for heretikes
 into the Popes Inquisition. 
 All the examples hitherto produced by the Lord Cardinall on a rowe, are of a latter date,
 they lacke weight, are drawne from the time of bondage, and make the Popes themselues
 witnesses in their owne cause: They descant not vpon the point of deposition, but onely strike
 out and sound the notes of excommunication and interdiction, which make nothing at all to the
 musicke of the question. And therefore hee telleth vs (in kindnesse as I take it) more
 oftentimes then once or twice, that hee speaketh onely of the fact; as one that doeth
 acknowledge him- selfe to bee out of the right: Hee relates things done, but neuer what should
 bee done: which, as the Iudicious know, is to teach nothing.

THE SECOND INCONVENIENCE EXAMINED. 
 THE second Inconuenience like to grow, (as the Lord Cardinall seemeth to be halfe afraid)
 if the Article of the third Estate might
 haue passed with approba- tion, is couched in these words: Lay-men shall by
 authoritie bee strengthened with power, to iudge in matters of Religion; as also to determine
 the doctrine comprised in the said Article to haue requisite conformitie with Gods word: yea
 they shall haue it in their hands to compell Ecclesiastics by necessitie, to sweare, preach,
 and teach the opinion of the one side, as also by Sermons and publike writings to impugne the
 other . This inconuenience he aggrauateth with swelling words, and breaketh out into
 these vehement exclamations: O reproach, O scandall, O gate set open to a
 world of heresies . He therefore laboureth both by reasons, and by authorities of holy
 Scripture, to make such vsurped power of Laics, a fowle, shameful, and odious practise. In the
 whole, his Lordship toyles himselfe in vaine, & maketh suppositions of castles in the
 aire. For in preferring this Article, the third Estate haue born themselues not as iudges or
 vmpires, but altogether as petitioners: re- questing the said Article might be received into
 the number of the Parliament bookes to bee presented vnto the King and his Counsell, vnto whom
 in all humili- tie they referred the iudgment of the said Article; conceiuing all good hope
 the Clergie and Nobilitie would be pleased to ioyne for the furtherance of their humble
 petition. They were not so ignorant of State-matters, or so vnmindfull of their owne places
 and charges, to beare themselues in hand, that a petition put vp and preferred by the third
 Estate, can carry the force of a Law or Statute, so long as the other two Orders withstand the
 same, and so long as the King himselfe holds backe his Royall consent. Besides, the said
 Article was not propounded as a point of Religious doctrine; but for euer after to remaine and
 continue a funda- mentall Law of the Common-wealth and State it selfe, the due care whereof
 was put into their handes, and committed to their trust. If the King had ratified the said
 Article with Royall consent, and had commanded the Clergie to put in execu- tion the contents
 thereof; it had bene their duetie to see the Kings will and pleasure fulfilled, as they are
 subiects bound to giue him aide in all things, which may any way serue to procure the safetie
 of his life, and the tranquilitie of his Kingdome: Which if the Clergie had performed to the
 vttermost of their power, they had not shewed obedience as vnderlings, vnto the third Estate,
 but vnto the King alone; by whom such command had bene imposed, vpon suggestion of his
 faithfull subiects, made the more watchfull by the negligence of the Clergie; whom they
 perceiue to be lincked with stricter bandes vnto the Pope, then they are vnto their King. Here
 then the Cardinall fights with meere shadowes, and mooues a doubt whereof his aduersaries haue
 not so much as once thought in a dreame: But yet, according to his great dexteritie and
 nimblenesse of spirit, by this deuice he cunningly takes vpon him to giue the King a lesson
 with more libertie; making semblance to direct his masked Oration to the
 Deputies of the people, when hee shooteth in effect, and pricketh at his King, the Princes
 also and Lords of his Counsell, whom the Cardinall compriseth vnder the name of Laics; whose
 iudgment (it is not vnlikely) was apprehended much better by the Clergie, then the iudgement
 of the third Estate. Now these are the men whom he tearmes intruders into other mens charges,
 and such as open a gate for I wot not how many legions of heresies, to rush into the Church:
 For if it be proper to the Clergie and their Head, to iudge in this cause of the Right of
 Kings; then the King himselfe, his Princes, and Nobilitie, are debarred and wiped of all
 iudgement in the same cause, no lesse then the representatiue body of the people. 
 Well then, the L. Cardinall showres downe
 like haile sundry places and testimonies of Scripture, where the people are commanded to haue
 their Pastors in singular loue, and to beare them all respects of due obseruance. Be it so;
 yet are the said passages of Scripture no barre to the people, for their vigilant circum-
 spection, to preserue the life and Crowne of their Prince, against all the wicked enterprises
 of men stirred vp by the Clergie, who haue their Head out of the King- dome, and hold
 themselues to be none of the Kings subiects: a thing neuer spoken by the sacrificing Priests
 and Prelates, mentioned in the passages alleadged by the Lord Cardinal. He likewise produceth
 two Christian Emperours, 
 Constantine and Valentinian by name; the first
 refusing to meddle with iudgement in Episcopall causes: the other forbearing to iudge of
 subtile Questions in Diuinity, with protestation, that Hee would neuer bee
 so curious, to diue into the streames, or sound the bottome of so deepe matters . But who
 doth not know, that working and prouid- ing for the Kings indemnitie and safetie, is neither
 Episcopall cause, nor matter of curious and subtile inquisition ? The same answere meets with
 all the rest of the places produced by the L. Cardinal out of the Fathers. And that one for
 example, out of Gregory Nazianzenus , is not cited by
 the Cardinall with faire dealing. For Gregory doeth not boord the
 Emperour himselfe, but his Deputy or L. President, on this maner: For we
 also are in authoritie and place of a Ruler, we haue command aswell as your selfe : wheras the L. Cardinal with foule play, turnes the place in these termes, We also are Emperours . Which words can beare no such inter- pretation, as
 well because he to whom the Bishop then spake, was not of Imperiall dignitie; as also because
 if the Bishop himselfe, a Bishop of so small a citie as Nazianzum , had
 qualified himselfe Emperour, hee should haue passed all the bounds of modestie, and had shewed
 himselfe arrogant aboue measure. For as touching subiection due to Christian Emperours, hee
 freely acknowledgeth a little before, that himselfe and his people are
 subiect vnto the superiour powers, yea bound to pay them tribute .
 The historie of the same Gregories life doeth testifie, that he was
 drawen by the Arrians before the Consuls iudgement seate, and from
 thence returned acquitted, without either stripes or any other kinde of con- 
 tumelious entreatie and vse: yet now at last vp starts a Prelate, who dares make this good
 Father vaunt himselfe to be an Emperour. It is willingly granted, that Emperours neuer
 challenged, neuer arrogated, to bee Soueraigne Iudges in con- trouersies of doctrine and
 faith; neuerthelesse it is clearer then the Sunnes light at high noone, that for moderation at
 Synods, for determinations and orders established in Councils, and for the discipline of the
 Church, they haue made a good and a full vse of their Imperiall authoritie. The first
 Council held
 at Con- stantinople , beares this title or inscription; The dedication of the holy Synode to the most religious Emperour 
 Theodosius the Great, to whose will and pleasure they haue submitted these
 Canons by them addressed and established in Councill . And there they also beseech the
 Emperour, to confirme and approue the said Canons. The like hath bene done by the Council of
 Trullo , by whom the Canons of the fift and sixt Councils were put
 foorth and published. This was not done, because Em- perours tooke vpon them to bee infallible
 Iudges of doctrine; but onely that Emperours might see and iudge, whether Bishops (who feele
 the pricke of am- bition as other men doe) did propound nothing in their Conuocations and Con-
 sultations, but most of all in their Determinations, to vndermine the Emperours authoritie, to
 disturbe the tranquilitie of the Common-wealth, and to crosse the determinations of precedent
 Councils. Now to take the cognizance of such matters out of the Kings hand or power; what is
 it but euen to transforme the King into a standing Image, to wring and wrest him out of all
 care of himselfe and his Kingly Charge, yea to bring him downe to this basest condition, to
 be- come onely an executioner, and (which I scorne to speake) the vnhappy hangman of the
 Clergies will, without any further cognizance, not so much as of matters which most neerely
 touch himselfe, and his Royall estate ? 
 I grant it is for Diuinitie Scholes, to iudge how farre the power of the Keyes doth stretch:
 I grant againe, that Clerics both may, and ought also to display the colours and ensignes of
 their censures against Princes, who violating their publike and solemne oath, doe raise and
 make open warre against Iesus Christ: I grant yet againe, that in this
 case they need not admit Laics to be of their coun- sell, nor allow them any scope or libertie
 of iudgement. Yet all this makes no barre to Clerics, for extending the power of their keyes,
 many times a whole degree further then they ought; and when they are pleased, to make vse of
 their said power, to depriue the people of their goods, or the Prince of his Crowne: all this
 doeth not hinder Prince or people from taking care for the preseruation of their owne rights
 and estates, nor from requiring Clerics to shew their cards, and produce their Charts, and to
 make demonstration by Scripture, that such power as they assume and challenge, is giuen them
 from God. For to leaue the Pope absolute Iudge in the same cause, wherein hee is a partie, and
 (which is the strongest rampier and bulwarke, yea the most glorious and eminent point of his
 domination) to arme him with power to vnhorse Kings out of their seates; what is
 it else but euen to draw them into a state of despaire for euer winning the day, or preuailing
 in their honourable and rightful cause ? 
 It is moreouer granted, if a King shall command any thing directly contrary to Gods word,
 and tending to the subuerting of the Church; that Clerics in this case ought not onely to
 dispense with subiects for their obedience, but also ex- presly to forbid their obedience: For
 it is alwayes better to obey God then man. Howbeit in all other matters, whereby the glory and
 maiestie of God is not impeached or impaired, it is the duety of Clerics to plie the people
 with wholesome exhortation to constant obedience, and to auert by earnest disswasions the said
 people from tumultuous reuolt and seditious insurrection. This practise vnder the Pagan
 Emperours, was held and followed by the ancient Christians; by whose godly zeale and patience
 in bearing the yoke, the Church in times past grew and flourished in her happy and plentifull
 increase, farre greater then Poperie shall euer purchase and attaine vnto by all her cunning
 deuices and sleights: as namely by degrading of Kings, by interdicting of Kingdoms, by
 apposted murders, and by Diabolicall traines of Gunne-powder-mines. 
 The places of Scripture alleadged in order by the Cardinal, in fauour of those that stand
 for the Popes claime of power and authoritie to depose Kings, are cited with no more sincerity
 then the former: They alledge (these are his words) that Samuel deposed King Saul, or declared him
 to bee deposed, because hee had violated the Lawes of the Iewes Religion : His Lordship auoucheth elsewere, that Saul was deposed, because he had sought prophanely to vsurpe the holy
 Priest- hood. Both false and contrary to the tenour of trewth in the sacred history: For Saul was neuer deposed according to the sense of the word (I meane, depose) in the present question; to wit, as deposing is taken for
 despoiling the King of his royall dignitie, and reducing the King to the condition of a
 priuate person: But Saul 
 
 held the title of King, and continued in possession of his Kingdome, euen to his dying day.
 Yea, the Scripture styles him King, euen to the periodicall and last day of his life, by the
 testimony of Dauid himselfe, who both by Gods promise, and by precedent
 vnction, was then heire apparant as it were to the Crown, in a maner then ready to gird and
 adorne the temples of his head. For if Samuel , by Gods commandement,
 had then actually remooued Saul from his Throne, doubt- lesse the whole
 Church of Israel had committed a grosse errour, in taking and honouring Saul for their King, after such deposition: doubtlesse the Prophet Samuel himselfe, making knowen the Lords Ordinance vnto the people, would haue enioyned
 them by strict prohibition to call him no longer the King of Israel: Doubtlesse, Dauid would neuer haue held his hand from the throat of Saul , for this respect and consideration, because he was the Lords Anointed. For if Saul had
 lost his Kingly authority, from that instant when Samuel gaue him
 knowl- edge of his reiection; then Dauid , lest otherwise the Body of
 the Kingdome should want a Royall Head, was to beginne his Reigne, and to beare the Royall scepter in the very same instant: which were to charge the holy Scriptures with
 vntrewth, in as much as the sacred historie begins the computation of the yeeres of Dauids Reigne, from the day of Sauls death. Trew it
 is, that in the I. Sam. cap. 15. Saul was denounced by Gods owne
 sentence, a man reiected, and as it were excommunicated out of the Kingdome, that hee should
 not rule and reigne any longer as King ouer Israel; neuerthelesse, the said sentence was not
 put in execution, before the day when God, executing vpon Saul an
 exemplarie iudge- ment, did strike him with death. From whence it is manifest and cleare, that
 when Dauid was annointed King by Samuel , that
 action was onely a promise, and a
 testimony of the choice, which God had made of Dauid for succession
 immediately after Saul ; and not a present establishment, inuestment, or
 install- ment of Dauid in the Kingdome. Wee reade the like in I. King.
 cap. 19. where God commandeth Elias the Prophet, to annoint Hasael King of Syria : For can any man bee so blinde
 and ignorant in the sacred historie, to beleeue the Prophets of Israel established, or sacred
 the Kings of Syria ? For this cause, when Dauid 
 was actually established in the Kingdome, hee was annointed the second time. 
 
 In the next place he brings in the Popes champions vsing these words; 
 Rehoboam was deposed by Ahiah the Prophet, from his Royall right ouer the
 tenne Tribes of Israel, because his father Salomon had played the Apostata, in falling from
 the Law of God . This I say also is more, then the trewth of the sacred history doeth
 afoard: For Ahiah neuer spake to Rehoboam (for
 ought we reade,) nor brought vnto him any message from the Lord; As for the passagequoted by
 the L. Cardinal out of 3. Reg . chap. 11 . it hath not reference to the
 time of Rehoboams raigne, but rather indeed to Salomons time: nor doeth
 it carry the face of a iudicatorie sentence for the Kings deposing, but rather of a
 Propheticall predic- tion: For how could Rehoboam , before hee was made
 King, be depriued of the Kingdome ? Last of all, but worst of all; to alleadge this passage
 for an example of a iust sentence in matter of deposing a King, is to approoue the disloyall
 treacherie of a seruant against his master, and the rebellion of Ieroboam branded in Scripture with a marke of perpetuall infamie for his wickednesse
 and impietie. 
 He goes on with an other example of no more trewth; 
 King Achab was deposed by Elias the Prophet, because he imbraced false
 religion, and worshipped false gods. False too like the former; King Achab lost his crowne and his life both together. The Scripture, that speaketh not
 according to mans fancie, but according to the trewth, doeth extend and number the yeeres of
 Achabs raigne, to the time of his death. Predictions of a Kings ruine,
 are no sentences of deposition. Elias neuer gaue the subiects of Achab absolution from their oath of obedience; neuer gaue them the least
 inckling of any such absolution; neuer set vp, or placed any other King in Achabs throne. 
 That of the L. Cardinall a little after,
 is no lesse vntrew: That King Vzziah was driuenfrom the conuersation of the
 people by Azarias the Priest, and thereby the 
 
 administration of his Kingdome was left no longer in his power . Not so:
 For when God had smitten Vzziah with leprosie in his forehead, he
 withdrew himselfe, or went out into an
 house apart, for feare of infecting such as were whole by his con- tagious disease. The high
 Priest smote him not with any sentence of deposition, or denounced him suspended from the
 administration of his Kingdome. No: the dayes of his raigne are numbred in Scripture, to the
 day of his death. And whereas the Priest, according to the Law in the 13. of Leuit . iudged the King to be vncleane; he gaue sentence against him, not as against a
 criminal person, and thereby within the compasse of deposition; but as against a diseased
 body: For the Law inflicteth punishments, not vpon diseases, but vpon crimes. Hereupon,
 whereas it is recorded by Iosephus in his Antiquities, that Vzziah led a priuate, and in a
 maner, a solitarie life; the said author doeth not meane, that Vzziah 
 was deposed, but onely that he disburdened himselfe of care to mannage the publique affaires. 
 The example of Mattathias , by whom the Iewes were stirred vp to rebel against Antiochus , is no better worth: For in that example we finde no sentence of deposition,
 but onely an heartning and commotion of a people then grieuously afflicted and oppressed. He
 that makes himselfe the ringleader of conspiracie against a King, doeth not foorthwith assume
 the person, or take vp the office and charge of a Iudge, in forme of Law, and iuridically to
 depriue a King of his Regall rights, and Royall prerogatiues. Mattathias was chiefe of that conspiracie, not in qualitie of Priest, but of
 cheiftaine, or leader in warre and a man the best qualified of all the people. Things acted by
 the suddaine violence of the base vulgar, muste not stand for Lawes, nor yet for proofes and
 arguments of ordinarie power, such as the Pope challengeth to himselfe, and appropriateth to
 his triple-Crowne. 
 These be our solide answeres: we disclaime the light armour which the L. Cardinall is pleased to furnish vs withall, forsooth to
 recreate himselfe, in rebat- ing the points of such weapons, as hee hath vouchsafed to put
 into our hands. Now it wil be worth our labour to beate by his thrusts, fetch from the
 ordinary mission of the New Testament, from leprosie, stones, and locks of wooll: A leach no
 doubt of admirable skill, one that for subiecting the Crownes of Kings vnto the Pope, is able
 to extract arguments out of stones; yea, out of the leprosie, and the drie scab, onely
 forsooth because heresie is a kind of leprosie, and an heretike hath some affinitie with a
 leper. But may not his Quoniam , bee as fitly applyed to any contagious
 and inueterate vice of the minde beside heresie ? His warning- piece therefore is discharged to purpose, whereby hee notifies that
 hee pretendeth to handle nothing with resolution: For indeed vpon so weake arguments, a
 resolution is but ill-fauouredly and weakely grounded. 
 His bulwarkes thus beaten downe, let vs now view the strength of our owne. First, he makes
 vs to fortifie on this maner: They that are for the negatiue, doe 
 
 alleadge the authoritie of S. Paul; Let euery soule
 bee subiect vnto the higher powers: For whosoeuer resisteth the power, resisteth the
 ordinance of God. And likewise that of S. Peter; Submit your selues,
 whether it be vnto the King, as vnto the superiour, or vnto gouernours, &c. Vpon these
 passages, and the like, they in ferre, that the obedience is due to Kings by the Law of God,
 and not dispensable by any Spirituall or Temporall authoritie. Thus he brings vs in with our first weapon. But here the very
 chiefe sinew and strength of our argument, hee doeth wittingly balked and of purpose conceale:
 To wit; That all the Emperors of whom the said holy Apostles haue made any mention in their
 diuine Epistles, were professed enemies to CHRIST, Pagans, Infidels, fearefull and bloody
 Tyrants: to whom notwithstand- ing euery soule , and therefore the
 Bishop of Rome for one, is commanded to sub- mit himselfe, and to professe subiection. Thus
 much Chrysostome hath expresly taught in his Hom. 23. vpon the Epistle
 to the Romanes; The Apostle giues this commandement vnto all: euen to
 Priests also, and cloistered Monkes not onely to Secular: be thou an Apostle, an Euangelist,
 a Prophet, &.c . Besides, it is here worthy to be noted, that howsoeuer the Apostles
 rule is generall, and therefore bindeth all the faithfull in equall bands; yet is it
 particularly, directly, and of purpose addressed to the Church of Rome by S. Paul , as by one who in the spirit of an Apostle did foresee, that rebellion against
 Princes was to rise and spring from the citie of Rome. Now in case the Head of that Church by
 warrant of any priuiledge, contained in the most holy Register of Gods holy word, is exempted
 from the binding power of this generall precept or rule; did it not become his Lord- ship to
 shew by the booke, that it is a booke case, and to lay it foorth before that honourable
 assembly, who no doubt expected and waited to heare when it might fall from his learned lips ?
 But in stead of any such authenticall and canonicall confirmation, he flieth to a sleight
 shift, and with a cauill is bold to affirme the foundation, laid by those of our side, doeth
 no way touch the knot of the con- trouersie. Let vs heare him speake: It is
 not in controuersie, whether obedience be due to kings by Gods Law, so long as they are
 kings, or acknowledged for Kings, but our point controuerted, is whether by Gods Law it be
 required, that hee who hath bene once recognised and receiuedfor King by the body of Estates,
 can at any time be taken and reputed as no King, that is to say can doe no maner of acte
 whereby hee may loose his right, and so cease to be saluted King . This answere of the L.
 Cardinall is the rare deuise, euasion, and starting hole of the Iesuites : In whose eares of delicate and tender touch, King-killing soundeth very
 harsh; but forsooth to vn-king a King first, and then to giue him the stab, that is a point of
 iust and trew descant: For to kill a King, once vnking'd by deposition, is not killing of a
 King: For the present, I haue one of that Iesuiticall Order in prison, who hath face enough to
 speake this language of Ashdod, and to maintaine this doctrine of the Iesuites Colledges. The L. Cardinall harpes vpon the same string; He can like
 subiection and obedience to the King, whilest he sitteth King: but his Holinesse must haue all power, and giue order withall, to hoyst him out of his Royall Seat. I therefore
 now answer, that in very deed the former passages of S. Paul and S. Peter should come nothing neere the question, if the state of the question
 were such as he brings it, made and forged in his owne shop. But certes the states of the
 ques- tion is not, whether a King may doe some acte, by reason whereof hee may fall from his
 right, or may not any longer be acknowledged for King: For all our contention is, concerning
 the Popes power to vn-authorize Princes; whereas in the question framed and fitted by the L.
 Cardinal, not a word of the Pope. For were it granted and agreed on both sides, that a King by
 election might fal from his Kingdom, yet stil the knot of the question would hold, whether he
 can be dis- possessed of his Regal authoritie, by any power in the Pope, & whether the
 Pope hath such fulnes of power, to strip a King of those Royall robes, rights, and reuenewes
 of the Crowne, which were neuer giuen him by the Pope; as also by what authoritie of holy
 Scripture, the Pope is able to beare out himselfe in this power, and to make it good. 
 But here the L. Card. stoutly saith in his
 owne defence by way of reioinder; As one text hath, Let euery soule be
 subiect vnto the higher powers; in like manner an other text hath, Obey your Prelates, and be
 subiect vnto your Pastors: for they watch ouer your soules, as men that shall giue an accompt
 for your soules . This reason is void of reason, and makes against himselfe: For may not
 Prelates be obeyed and honoured, without Kings be deposed ? If Prelates preach the doc- trine
 of the Gospell, will they in the pulpit stirre vp subiects to rebell against Kings ? Moreouer,
 whereas the vniuersall Church in these daies is diuided into so many discrepant parts, that
 now Prelates neither doe nor can draw all one way; is it not exceeding hard, keeping our
 obedience towards God, to honour them all at once with due obedience ? Nay; is not here
 offered vnto me a dart out of the L. Cardinals armorie, to cast at himselfe ? For as God
 chargeth all men with obedience to Kings, and yet from that commaundement of God, the L.
 Cardinall would not haue it inferred, that Kings haue power to degrade Ecclesiasticall
 Prelates: euen so God giueth charge to obey Prelates, yet doeth it not follow from hence, that
 Prelates haue power to depose Kings. These two degrees of obedience agree well together, and
 are each of them bounded with peculiar and proper limits. 
 But for so much as in this point, we haue on our side the whole auncient Church, which,
 albeit she liued and groned for many aages together vnder heathen Emperours, heretikes, and
 persecuters, did neuer so much as whisper a word about rebelling and falling from their
 Soueraigne Lords, and was neuer by any mortall creature freed from the oath of allegiance to
 the Emperour; the Cardinall is not vnwilling to graunt, that ancient Christians in those times
 were bound to performe such fidelity and allegiance, for as much as the Church (the Cardinall
 for shame durst not say the Pope) then had not absolued them of their oath. No
 doubt a pleasant dreame, or a merry conceit rather, to imagine the Bishop of Rome was armed
 with power to take away the Empire of the world from Nero , or Claudius , or Domitianus ; to whom it was not knowen,
 whether the citie of Rome had any Bishop at all. Is it not a master-iest, of a straine most
 ridiculous, to pre- suppose the Grand-masters and absolute Lords of the whole world, had a
 sent so dull, that the were not able to smell out, and to nose things vnder their owne noses ?
 that they saw so little with other mens eies and their owne, that within their capitall citie,
 they could not spie that Soueraigne armed with ordinary and lawfull authority to degrade, and
 to turne them out of their renowned Empire ? Doubtlesse the said Emperours, vassals belike of
 the Popes Empire, are to be held excused for not acknowledging and honouring the Pope in
 quality of their Lord, as became his vassals; because they did not know there was any such
 power in the world, as aftertimes haue magnified and adored vnder the qualitie of Pope: For
 the Bishops of Rome in those times, were of no greater authoritie, power, and means, then some
 of the Bishops are in these daies within my Kingdomes. 
 But certes those Popes of that primitiue aage, thought it not expedient in the said times to
 draw their swords: they exercised their power in a more mild and soft kind of carriage toward
 those miserable Emperours, for three seuerall reasons alledged by the L. Cardinall. 
 The first: because the Bishops then durst not by their censures whet and prouoke those
 Emperours, for feare of plunging the Church in a Sea of persecu- tions. But if I be not cleane
 voide of common sense, this reason serueth to charge not onely the Bishops of Rome, but all
 the auncient professors of Christ besides, with deepe dissimulation and hypocrisie: For it is
 all one as if he had professed, that all their obedience to their Soueraignes, was but
 counterfeit, and extorted, or wrong out of them by force; that all the submissiue
 supplications of the auncient Fathers, the assured testimonies and pledges of their
 allegiance, humili- tie, and patience, were but certaine formes of disguised speech,
 proceeding not freely from the suggestions of fidelity, but faintly and fainedly, or at least
 from the strong twitches and violent conuulsions of feare. Whereupon it followes, that all
 their torments and punishments, euen to the death, are wrongfully hon- oured with the title,
 and crowned with the crowne of Martyrdome; because their patience proceeded not from their
 owne free choice and election, but was taught by the force of necessitie, as by compulsion:
 and whereas they had not mu- tinously and rebelliously risen in armes, to asswage the
 scorching heat and burn- ing flames of tyrannicall persecuters, it was not for want of will,
 but for lacke of power. Which false and forged imputation, the Fathers haue cleared themselues
 of in their writings. Tertullian in his Apologet:
 All places are full of Christians, the cities, isles, castles, burroughs,
 armies, &c. If we that are so infinite a power, and multitude of men, had broken from you
 into some remote nooke or corner of the world, the cities no doubt had become naked and
 solitarie: there had beene a dreadfull and 
 
 horrible silence ouer the face of the whole Empire: the great Emperours had
 beene driuen to seeke out new cities, and to discouer newe nations, ouer whom to beare
 Soueragine sway and rule; there had remained more enemies to the State, then subiects and
 friends . Cyprian also
 against Demetrianus: None of vs all howsoeuer we are a people mighty and
 without number, haue made resistance against any of your vniust and wrongfull actions,
 executed with all violence; neither haue sought by rebel- lious armes, or by any other
 sinister practices, to crie quittance with you at any time for the righting of our
 selues . Certaine it is, that vnder Iulianus , the whole Em- pire
 in a manner professed the Christian Religion; yea, that his Leiftenants and great Commanders,
 as Iouinianus , and Valentinianus by name,
 professed Christ: Which two Princes not long after attained to the Imperiall dignitie, but
 might haue solicited the Pope sooner to degrade Iulianus from the
 Imperiall Throne. For say that Iulians whole army had renounced the
 Christian Religion: (as the L. Cardinall against all shew and appearance of trewth would beare
 vs in hand, and contrary to the generall voice of the said whole army, making this profession
 with one consent when Iulian was dead, Wee are all
 Christians :) yet Italie then persisting in the faith of Christ,
 and the army of Iulian then lying quartered in Persia , the vtmost limit of the Empire to the East, the Bishop of
 Rome had fit opportunitie to draw the sword of his authoritie (if hee
 had then any such sword hanging at his Pontificall side) to make Iulian 
 feele the sharpe edge of his weapon, and thereby to pull him downe from the stately pearch of
 the Romane Empire. I say moreouer, that by this generall and sudden profession of the whole
 Caesarian armie, Wee are all Christians , it is
 clearly testified, that if his armie or souldiers were then addicted to Paganisme, it was
 wrought by compulsion, and cleane con- trary to their setled perswasion before: and then it
 followes, that with greater patience they would haue borne the deposing of Iulian , then if hee had suffered them to vse the libertie of their conscience. To bee
 short in the matter; S. Augus- tine 
 makes all whole, and by his
 testimony doeth euince, that Iulians armie per- seuered in the faith of
 Christ. The souldiers of Christ serued a Heathen Emperour: But when the
 cause of Christ was called in question, they acknowledged none but Christ in heauen: When the
 Emperour would haue them to serue, and to perfume his idols with frankincense, they gaue
 obedience to God, rather then to the Emperour . After which words, the very same words
 alleadged by the L. Cardinall against
 himselfe doe follow; They did then distinguish betweene the Lord Eternal,
 and the Lord temporall: neuerthelesse, they were subiect vnto the Lord temporall, for the
 Lord Eternall . It was therefore to pay God his duetie of obedience, and not for feare to
 incense the Emperour, or to draw persecution vpon the Church (as the L. Cardinal would made vs
 beleeue) that Christians of the Primitiue Church, and Bishops by their censures, durst not
 anger and prouoke their Emperours. But his Lordship by his coloured pretences doeth manifestly
 prouoke and stirre vp the people to rebellion, so soone as they know their own
 strength to beare out a re- bellious practise: Whereupon it followes, that in case their
 conspiracie shall take no good effect, all the blame and fault must lie, not in their
 disloyalty and treason, but in the bad choice of their times for the best aduantage, and in
 the want of taking a trew sight of their owne weakenesse. Let stirring spirits be trained vp
 in such practicall precepts, let desperate wits be seasoned with such rules of dis- cipline;
 and what need we, or how can wee wonder they contriue Powder-con- spiracies, and practise the
 damnable art of parricides ? 
 After Iulian , his Lordship falles vpon Valentinian the younger, who maintain- ing Arrianisme with great and open violence,
 might haue bene deposed by the Christians from his Empire, and yet (say wee) they neuer
 dream'd of any such practise. Heere the L. Cardinall maketh answere: The Christians mooued with respect vnto the
 fresh memory both of the brother and father, as also vnto the weake estate of the sonnes
 young yeeres, abstained from all counsels and courses of sharper effect and operation .
 To which answere I replie: these are but friuolous coniec- tures, deuised and framed to ticle
 his owne fancie: For had Valentinianus the younger beene the sonne of
 an Arrian , and had then also attained to threescore yeeres of aage,
 they would neuer haue borne themselues in other fashion then they did, towards their Emperour.
 Then the Cardinall goeth on: The people would not abandon the factious and seditious party,
 but were so firme or obstinate rather for the faction, that Valentinian 
 for feare of the tumultuous vproares was constrained to giue way, and was threatened by the
 souldiers, that except hee would adhere vnto the Catholikes, they would yeeld him no
 assistance, nor stand for his partie. Now this answere of the L. Cardinall makes nothing to
 the purpose, concerning the Popes power to pull downe Kings from their stately nest. Let vs
 take notice of his proper consequence. Valentinian was afraid of the
 popu- lar tumult at Milan ; the Pope therefore hath power to curbe
 Hereticall Kings by deposition. Now marke what distance is betweene Rome and Milan , what dif- ference betweene the people of Milan , and the Bishop of Rome ; betweene a popular
 tumult, and a iudicatorie sentence; betweene fact and right, things done by the people or
 souldiers of Milan , and things to be done according to right and law by
 the Bishop of Rome ; the same distance, the same difference (if not
 farre greater) is betweene the L. Cardinals antecedent and his consequent, betweene his
 reason, and the maine cause or argument which we haue in hand. The mad commotion of the people
 was not heere so much to bee regarded, as the sad in- struction of the Pastour, of their good
 and godly Pastour S. Ambrose , so farre from hartening the people of Milan to rebel, that being Bishop of Milan , he
 offered himself to suffer Martydome: If the Emperour abuse his Imperiall
 authority , (for so Theodoret hath recited his words) to tyrannize thereby, heere am I ready to suffer death . And what
 resistance he made against his L. Emperor, was onely by way of supplication in these termes;
 Wee beseech thee , 0 Augustus, as humble
 suppliants; 
 
 we offer no resistance: we are not infeare, but weflie to supplication .
 Againe, If my patrimony be your marke, enter vpon my patrimony if my body I
 wil goe and meet my torments. Shall I be drag'd to prison or to death ? I will take delight
 in both. Item, in his Oration to Auxentius; I can afflict my soule
 with sorrow, I can lament, I can send forth grieuous groans: My weapons against either of
 both, souldiers or Goths, are teares: A Priest hath none other weapons of defence: I neither
 can resist, nor ought in any other maner to make resistance. 
 
 Iustinian the Emperour in his old aage fell into the heresie of the
 Aphtharto- docites . Against Iustinian , though
 few they were that fauoured him in that heresie, the Bishop of Rome 
 neuer darted with violence any sentence of excom- munication, interdiction, or deposition. 
 The Ostrogot Kings in Italie , the Visigot in Spaine , the Vandal in Africa were all addicted to the Arrian impietie, and some of them cruelly persecuted the trew professours. The Visigot and Vandall were no neighbours to Italie . The Pope thereby had the lesse cause to feare the stings of those
 waspes, if they had bene angred. The Pope for all that neuer had the humour to wrestle or
 iustle with any of the said Kings in the cause of deposing them from their Thrones. But espe-
 cially the times when the Vandals in Affricke ,
 and the Goths in Italie by Belisarius and Narses , professours of the Orthodoxe Faith, were
 tyred with long warres, and at last were vtterly defeated in bloody battels, are to bee
 considered. Then were the times or neuer, for the Pope to vnsheath his weapons, and to vncase
 his ar- rowes of deposition; then were the times to draw them out of his quiuer, and to shoot
 at all such Arrian heads; then were the times by dispensations to
 release their subiects of their oathes, by that peremptorie meanes to aide and strengthen the
 Catholique cause: But in that aage the said weapons were not knowne to haue bene hammered in
 the Pontificall forge. Gregorie the I. made his boasts, that he was
 able to ruine the Lombards, (for many yeeres together sworne enemies to the Bishops of Rome)
 their state present, and the hope of all their future prosperitie. But he telleth vs, that by
 the feare of God before his eyes and in his heart, he was bridled and restrained from any such
 intent; as elsewhere we haue obserued: 
 If I would haue medled with practis- ing and procuring the death of the
 Lombards, the whole nation of the Lombards at this day had bene robbed of their Kings, Dukes,
 Earles, they had bene reduced to the tearmes of extreame confusion . He might at least
 haue deposed their King, (if the credit of the L. Cardinals iudgement be currant) without
 polluting or stayning his owne conscience. 
 What can we tearme this assertion of the L. Cardinal, but open charging the most ancient
 Bishops of Rome with crueltie, when they would not succour the Church of CHRIST oppressed by
 tyrants, whose oppression they had power to represse by deposing the oppressors. Is it
 credible, that IESVS CHRIST hath giuen a Commission to S. Peter and his successors for so many aages, without any power to execute their
 Commission, or to make any vse thereof by practise ? Is it credible, that hee hath giuen them
 a sword to bee kept in the scabbard, without drawing once in a thousand yeeres ? Is it
 credible, that in the times when Popes were most deboshed, abandoning themselues to all sorts
 of corrupt and vitious courses, as is testified by their owne flatterers and best affected
 seruants; it is credible that in those times they began to vnderstand the vertue &
 strength of their Commission ? For if either feare or lacke of power, was the cause of holding
 their hands, and voluntarie binding of themselues to the Peace or good behauiour: wherefore is
 not some one Pope at least produced, who hath complained that he was hindered from executing
 the power that CHRIST had conferred vpon his Pontificall See ? Wherefore is not some one of
 the ancient and holy Fathers alledged, by whom the Pope hath bene aduised and exhorted to take
 courage, to stand vpon the vigor and sinewes of his Papall Office, to vnsheath and vncase his
 bolts of thunder against vngodly Princes, and grieuous enemies to the Church ? wherefore
 liuing vnder Christian and gracious Emperours, haue they not made knowne the reasons, why they
 were hindred from drawing the pretended sword; lest long custome of not vsing the sword so
 many aages, might make it so to rust in the scabbard, that when there should be occasion to
 vse the said sword, it could not be drawne at all; and lest so long custome of not vsing the
 same, should confirme prescription to their greater preiudice ? If weakenesse be a iust let,
 how is it come to passe, that Popes haue enterprised to depose Philip the
 Faire, Lewis the XII, and ELIZABETH my predecessor of happy memorie; (to let passe
 others) in whom experience hath well proued, how great inequalitie was betweene their
 strengths ? Yea, for the most part from thence grow most grieuous troubles and warres, which
 iustly recoile and light vpon his owne head; as happened to Gregorie 
 the VII. and Boniface the VIII. This no doubt is the reason, wherefore
 the Pope neuer sets in (for feare of such inconueniences) to blast a King with lightning and
 thunder of deposition, but when hee perceiues the troubled waters of the Kingdome by some
 strong faction setled in his Estate; or when the King is confined and bordered by some Prince
 more potent, who thirsteth after the prey, and is euer gaping for some occasion to picke a
 quarrell. The King standing in such estate, is it not as easie for the Pope to pull him downe,
 as it is for a man with one hand to thrust downe a tottering wall, when the groundsill is
 rotten, the studdes vnpind and nodding or bending towards the ground ? But if the King shall
 beare downe and breake the faction within the Realme; if hee shall get withall the vpper hand
 of his enemies out of the Kingdome; then the holy Father presents him with pardons neuer sued
 for, neuer asked; and in a fathers indul- gence forsooth, giues him leaue still to hold the
 Kingdome, that hee was not able by all his force to wrest and wring out of his hand, no more
 then the club of Her- cules out of his fist. How many worthy Princes,
 incensed by the Pope, to conspire against Soueraigne Lords their Masters, and by open
 rebellion to worke some change in their Estates, haue miscarried in the action,
 with losse of life, or honour, or both ? For example; Rodulphus Duke of
 Sueuia was eg'd on by the Pope, against Henry 
 IIII. of that name Emperour. How many massacres, how many desolations of Cities and townes,
 how many bloody battels ensued thereupon ? Let histories bee searched, let iust accompts be
 taken, and besides sieges layde to Cities, it will appeare by trew computation, that Henry the IIII. and Frederic the first, fought
 aboue threescore battels, in defence of their owne right against enemies of the Empire,
 stirred vp to armes by the Pope of Rome. How much Christian blood was then spilt in these
 bloody battels, it passeth mans wit, penne, or tongue to expresse. And to giue a little touch
 vnto matters at home; doeth not his Holinesse vnderstand right well the weakenesse of Papists
 in my Kingdome ? Doeth not his Holinesse neuerthelesse animate my Papists to rebellion, and
 forbid my Papists to take the Oath of Allegiance ? Doeth not his Holinesse by this meanes draw
 (so much as in him lyeth) persecution vpon the backes of my Papists as vpon rebels, and expose
 their life as it were vpon the open stall, to be sold at a very easie price ? All these
 examples, either ioynt or seuerall, are manifest and euident proofes, that feare to draw
 mischiefe and persecution vpon the Church, hath not barred the Popes from thundering against
 Emperours and Kings, when- soeuer they conceiued any hope, by their fulminations to aduance
 their greatnesse. 
 Last of all; I referred the matter to the most possessed with preiudice, euen the very
 aduersaries, whether this doctrine, by which people are trained vp in subiection vnto Infidel
 or hereticall Kings, vntill the subiects be of sufficient strength to mate their Kings, to
 expell their Kings, and to depose them from their Kingdomes, doth not incense the Turkish
 Emperours and other Infidell Princes to roote outall the Christians that drawe in their yoke,
 as people that waite onely for a fit occasion to rebell, and to take themselues ingaged for
 obedience to their Lords, onely by constraint and seruile feare. Let vs therefore now conclude
 with Ozius , in that famous Epistle
 speaking to Constantius an Arrian heretike: As hee
 that by secret practise or open violence would bereaue thee of thy Empire, should violate
 Gods ordinance: so bee thou touched with feare, least, by vsurping authoritie ouer Church
 matters, thou tumble not headlong into some hainous crime . Where this holy Bishop hath
 not vouchsafed to insert and mention the L. Cardinals excep- tion; to wit, the right of the
 Church alwaies excepted and saued, when she shall be of sufficient strength to shake off the
 yoke of Emperours. Neither speaks the same holy Bishop of priuate persons alone, or men of
 some particular condition and calling; but hee setteth downe a generall rule for all degrees,
 neuer to impeach imperial Maiesties upon any pretext whatsoever. 
 As his Lordships first reason drawne from weakenesse is exceeding weake: so is thatwhich the
 L. Cardinall takes vp in the next place: He tellethvs there is very great difference betweene Pagan Emperours, and
 Christian Princes: Pagan Emperours who neuer did homage to Christ, who neuer were by their
 subiects receiued, with condition 
 
 to acknowledge perpetuall subiection vnto the Empire of Christ; who neuer
 were bound by oath and mutuall contract between Prince and subiect. Christian Princes who
 slide backe by Apostasie, degenerate by Arrianisme, or fall away by Mahometisme. 
 Touching the latter of these two, (as his Lordshippe saith) If they shall as
 it were take an oath, and make a vowe contrary to their first oath and vow made and taken
 when they were installed, and contrary to the condition vnder which they receiued the Scepter
 of their Fathers; if they withall shall turne persecutors of the Catholike re- ligion ;
 touching these I say, the L. Cardinal holds, that without question they may bee remooued from
 their Kingdomes: He telleth vs not by whom, but euery where he meaneth by the Pope. Touching
 Kings deposed by the Pope vnder pretence of stupidity, as Childeric ; or
 of matrimoniall causes, as Philip I. or for collating of benefices, as
 Philip the Faire; not one word: By that point he easily glideth, and
 shuffles it vp in silence, for feare of distasting the Pope on the one side, or his auditors
 on the other. 
 Now in alledging this reason, his Lordship makes all the world a witnes, that in deposing of
 Kings, the Pope hath no eye of regard to the benefit and securitie of the Church: For such
 Princes as neuer suckt other milke then that of Infidelitie and persecution of Religion, are
 no lesse noisome and pernicious vermin to the Church, then if they had sucked of the Churches
 breasts. And as for the great- nesse of the sinne or offence, it seemes to me there is very
 little difference in the matter. For a Prince that neuer did sweare any religious obedience to
 IESUS Christ , is bound no lesse to such obedience, then if he had taken
 a solemne oath: As the sonne that rebelliously stands vp against his father, is in equall
 degree of sinne, whether he hath sworne or not sworne obedience to his father; because he is
 bound to such obedience, not by any voluntarie contract or couenant, but by the law of Nature.
 The commaundement of God to kisse the Sonne, whom the Father hath confirmed and ratified King
 of Kings, doeth equally bind all Kings, as well Pagans as Christians. On the other side, who
 denies, who doubts, that Constantius Emperour at his first steppe or
 entrance into the Empire, did not sweare and bind himselfe by solemne vowe, to keepe the rules
 and to maintaine the precepts of the Orthodox faith, or that he did not receiue his fathers
 Empire vpon such condition? This notwithstanding, the Bishop of Rome 
 pulled not Constantius from his Imperiall throne, but Constantius remooued the Bishop of Rome from his Papall See. And
 were it so, that an oath taken by a King at his consecration, and after violated, is a
 sufficient cause for the Pope to depose an Apostate or hereticall Prince; then by good
 consequence the Pope may in like sort depose a King, who beeing neither dead in Apostasie, nor
 sicke of Heresie, doeth neglect onely the due administration of iustice to his loyall
 subiects: For his oath taken at consecration importeth likewise, that he shall minister
 iustice to his people. A point wherein the holy Father is held short by the L. Cardinall, who
 dares prescribe new lawes to the Pope, and presumes to limit his fulnesse of
 power , within certaine meeres and head-lands, extending the Popes power only to the deposing of Christian Kings, when they turne Apostats forsaking the Catholike faith;
 and not such Princes as neuer breathed any thing but pure Paganisme, and neuer serued vnder
 the colours of Iesus Christ. Meanewhile his Lordship forgets, that King Attabaliba was deposed by the Pope from his King- dome of Peru ,
 and the said Kingdome was conferred vpon the King of Spaine, though the
 said King of Peru never forsook his heathen superstition; and though
 the turning of him out of his terrestriall Kingdome was no way to conuert him vnto the faith
 of Christ. Yea his Lordship a little after
 telleth vs himselfe, that Be the Turkes possession in the conquests that he
 maketh ouer Christians neuer so auncient, yet by no long tract of time whatsoeuer, can he
 gaine so much as a thumbes breadth of prescription : that is to say, the Turke for all
 that is but a disseisor, one that violently and wilfully keeps an other man from his owne, and
 by good right may be dispossessed of the same: whereas notwithstanding the Turkish Em- perours
 neuer fauoured nor sauoured Christianitie. Let vs runne ouer the ex- amples of Kings whom the
 Pope hath dared and presumed to depose; and hardly will any one be found, of whom it may be
 trewly auouched, that he hath taken an oath contrary to his oath of subiection to Iesus Christ , or that he hath wilfully cast himselfe into Apostaticall
 defection. 
 And certes to any man that weighs the matter with due consideration, it wil be found
 apparently false, that Kings of France haue bene receiued of their sub-
 iects at any time, with condition to serue IESVS CHRIST. They were actually Kings before they
 came forth to the solemnitie of their sacring, before they vsed any stipulation or promise to
 their subiects. For in hereditary kingdoms, (nothing more certaine, nothing more
 vncontrouleable) the Kings death in- stantly maketh liuery and seisin of the Royaltie, to his
 next successour. Nor is it materiall to replie, that a King succeeding by right of
 inheritance, takes an oath in the person of his predecessor. For euery oath is personall,
 proper to the person by whom it is taken: and to God no liuing creature can sweare, that his
 owne sonne or his heire shall proue an honest man. Well may the father, and with great
 solemnitie, promise that he will exhort his heire apparant with all his power and the best of
 his endeauours, to feare God and to practise piety. If the fathers oath be agreeable to the
 dueties of godlinesse, the sonne is bound thereby, whether he take an oath, or take none. On
 the other side, if the fathers oath come from the puddles of impietie, the sonne is bound
 thereby to goe the contrary way. If the fathers oath concerne things of indifferent nature,
 and such as by the variety or change of times, become either pernicious or impossible; then it
 is free for the Kings next successor and heire, prudently to fit and proportion his Lawes vnto
 the times present, and to the best benefit of the Common-wealth. 
 When I call these things to mind with some attention, I am out of all doubt, his Lordship is
 very much to seeke, in the right sense and nature of his Kings oath taken at his Coronation,
 to defend the Church, and to perseuere in the Catholike faith: For what is more
 vnlike and lesse credible then this conceit, that after Clouis had
 reigned 15. yeeres in the state of Paganisme, and then receiued holy Baptisme, he should
 become Christian vpon this condition, That in case hee should afterward reuolt from the Faith,
 it should then bee in the power of the Church, to turne him out of his Kingdome ? But had any
 such conditionall stipulation beene made by Clouis , in very good
 earnest and trewth; yet would hee neuer haue intended, that his deposing should bee the acte
 of the Romane Bishop, but rather of those (whether Peeres or people, or whole body of the
 State) by whom he had bene aduanced to the Kingdome. Let vs heare the trewth, and this is the
 trewth: It is farre from the customary vse in France , for their Kings
 to take any such oath, or to vse any such stipulation with their subiects. If any King or
 Prince wheresoeuer, doth vse an oath or solemne promise in these ex- presse termes, Let me lose my Kingdome, or my life, be that day my last both for life and
 reigne, when I shall first reuolt from the Christian Religion : By these words he calleth
 vpon God for vengeance, hee vseth imprecation against his owne head: but hee makes not his
 Crowne to stoupe by this meanes to any power in the Pope, or in the Church, or in the people. 
 And touching inscriptions vpon coynes, of which point his Lordship speaketh by the way;
 verely the nature of the money or coine (the stamping and minting whereof is one of the marks
 of the Prince his dignity and Soueraignty) is not changed by bearing the letters of Christ
 Name on the reuerse or on the front. Such characters of Christs Name, are aduertisements and
 instructions to the people, that in shewing and yeelding obedience vnto the King, they are
 obedient vnto the King, they are obedient vnto Christ; & those Princes likewise, who are
 so wel aduised, to haue the most sacred Names inscribed and printed in their coines, doe take
 and acknowledge Iesus Christ for supreme King of Kings. The said holy
 characters are no representation or profession, that any Kings Crowne dependeth vpon the
 Church, or can be taken away by the Pope. The L. Cardinal indeed so beareth vs in hand. But he
 inuerts the words of Iesus Christ , and wrings them out of the right
 ioynt: For Christ without all ambiguitie and circum- locution, by the image and inscription of
 the money, doeth directly and expressely prooue Caesar to bee free from
 subiection, and entirely Soueraigne. Now if such a supreme and Soueraigne Prince, at any time
 shall bandie and combine against God, and thereby shall become a rebellious and perfidious
 Prince; doubtless for such disloyaltie he shall deserue, that God would take from him all hope
 of life eternall: and yet hereby neither Pope nor people hath reason to bee puft vp, in their
 power to depriue him of his temporall Kingdome. 
 The L. Cardinall saith besides; The champions of the Popes power to depose Kings, doe expound that commandement
 of S. Paul, whereby euery soule is made sub- iect vnto the superiour
 powers, to bee a prouisionall precept or caution accommodated to the times; and to stand in
 force, onely vntill the Church were growen in strength vn- 
 
 to such a scantling, that it might be in the power of the faithfull, without
 shaking the pillars of Christian state, to stand in the breach, and cautelosly to prouide
 that none but Christian Princes might be receiued; according to the Law in Deut. Thou shalt
 make thee a King from among thy brethren . The reason whereupon they ground, is this: Because Paul saith, It is a shame for Christians to be
 iudged vnder vniust Infidels, in matters or businesse, which they had one against another:
 For which inconuenience, Iustinian after prouided by Law; when hee
 ordeined that no Infidel nor Heretike might be admitted to the administration of iustice in
 the Common-wealth. 
 
 In which words of the Cardinall, the word Receiued , is to bee
 obserued espe- cially and aboue the rest: For by chopping in that word, hee doeth nimbly and
 with a tricke of Legier demain , transforme or change the very state of
 the ques- tion. For the question or issue of the cause, is not about receiuing, establishing,
 or choosing a Prince; (as in those Nations where the Kingdome goes by election) but about
 doing homage to the Prince, when God hath setled him in the King- dome, and hath cast it vpon
 a Prince by hereditary succession: For that which is written, Thou shalt
 make thee a King , doeth no way concerne and touch the people of France in these dayes: because the making of their King hath not of long time been tyed
 to their election. The passage therefore in Deuter. makes nothing to the purpose; no more then
 doth Iustinians law: For it is our free and voluntary confession, that
 a Christian Prince is to haue speciall care of the Lawes, and to prouide that no vnbeleeuer be
 made Lord Chiefe-Iustice of the Land, that no Infidel be put in trust with administration of
 Iustice to the people. But here the issue doeth not direct vs to speake of Delegates, of
 subordinate Magistrates, and such as are in Commission from the Prince, but of the supreame
 Prince himselfe, the Soueraigne Magistrate ordained by nature, and confirmed by succession.
 Our question is, whether such a Prince can be vnthroned by the Pope, by whom he was not placed
 in the Throne; and whether the Pope can despoile such a Prince, of that Royaltie which was
 neuer giuen him by the Pope, vnder any pretended colour and imputation of heresie, of
 stupiditie, or infringing the priuiledges of Monaste- ries, or transgressing the Lawes and
 lines of holy Matrimonie. 
 Now that S. Pauls commandement which bindeth euery soule in the bands
 of subiection vnto the higher powers, is no precept giuen by way of prouiso , and onely to serue the times, but a standing and a perpetuall rule, it is
 hereby more than manifest. S. Paul hath grounded this commandement vpon
 certaine rea- sons, not onely constant and permanent by their proper nature, but likewise
 necessary for euery state, condition, and reuolution of the times. His reasons; Because all powers are ordained of God: because resisting of powers is
 resisting the ordinance of God: because the Magistrate beares the sword to execute iustice:
 because obedience and subiection to the Magistrate is necessary, not onely for feare of his
 wrath, or feare of punishment, but also for conscience sake . It is therefore a case
 grounded vpon conscience, it is not a Law deuised by humane wisedome; it is not fashionable to
 the qualities of the times. Apostolicall instructions for the right informing of
 maners, are not changeable according to times and seasons. To vse the L. Cardinals language,
 and to follow his fancie in the matter, is to make way for two pestiferous mischiefes: First,
 let it be free and lawfull for Christians, to hold the commanding rules of GOD for
 prouisionall cautions, and what followes ? Men are ledde into the broad way of impietie, and
 the whole Scripture is wiped of all authoritie. Then againe, for the other mischiefe: The
 glorious triumphes of most blessed Martyrs in their vnspeakable torments and sufferings, by
 the L. Car- dinals position shall bee iudged vnworthy to weare the title and Crowne of Mar-
 tyrdome. How so ? Because (according to his new fiction) they haue giuen place to the violence
 and furie of heathen Magistrates, not in obedience to the necessary and certaine Commandement
 of God, but rather to a prouisionall direction, ac- commodated to the humours of the times.
 And therfore the L. Cardinal hath vsed none other clay wherewith to dawbe ouer his deuise, but
 plaine falsification of holy Scripture: For he makes the Apostle say to the Corinthians, It is a shame for Christians to bee iudged vnder vnbeleeuing Magistrates ;
 whereas in that whole context of Paul, there is no such matter. For when the Apostle saith,
 I speake it euen to your shame ; he doeth not say it is a
 shame for a beleeuer to be iudged vnder an Infidel, but he makes them ashamed of their vngodly
 course, and vn- christian practise, that in suing and impleading one another, they layd their
 actions of contention in the Courts of vnbeleeuing Iudges. The shame was not in bearing that
 yoke which God had charged their necks withall, but in deuouring and eating vp one an other
 with Writs of habeas corpus , and with other Processes; as also in
 vncouering the shame, in laying open the shamefull parts and prankes played by Christians,
 before Infidels, to the great scandall of the Church. Here I say the L. Cardinall is taken in
 a tricke of manifest falsification. If therefore a King when he falls to play the heretike,
 deserueth to be deposed; why should not a Cardinall when he falls to play the iuggler with
 holy Scripture, deserue to be disrobed ? 
 Meane while the indifferent Reader is to consider, how greatly this doctrine is preiudicial,
 and how full of danger, to Christians liuing vnder hereticall or Pagan Princes. For make it
 once knowne to the Emperour of Turkes, let him once get neuer so little a smacke of this
 doctrine; that Christians liuing vnder his Empire doe take Gods commandement, for obedience to
 Princes whom they count In- fidels, to be onely a prouisional precept for a time, and wait
 euery houre for all occasions to shake off the yoke of his bondage; doubtlesse he will neuer
 spare with all speed to roote the whole stocke, with all the armes and branches of Christians
 out of his dominions. Adde hereunto the L. Cardinals former determination; that possession
 kept neuer so long by the Turke in his Conquests ouer Christians, gaines him not by so long
 tract of time one inch of prescription; and it will appear, that his Lordship puts the Turkish
 Emperour in minde, and by his in- struction leades the said Emperour as it were by the hand,
 to haue no maner of affiance in his Christian subiects; and withall to afflict
 his poore Christians with all sorts of most grieuous and cruell torments. In this regard the
 poore Christians of Grecia and Syria, must needs be very little beholden to his Lordship. As
 for my selfe, and my Popish Subiects, to whom 1 am no lesse then an heretike for- sooth am not
 I by this doctrine of the Cardinall, pricked and whetted against my naturall inclination, to
 turne clemencie into rigour; seeing that by his doctrine my subiects are made to beleeue, they
 owe me subiection onely by way of prouiso, and with waiting the
 occasion to worke my vtter destruction and finall ruine; the rather, because Turkes,
 miscreants, and heretikes are marshalled by the Cardinall in the same ranke; and heretikes are
 counted worse, yea more iustly deposeable, then Turkes and Infidels, as irreligious breakers
 and violaters of their oath ? Who seeth not here how great indignitie is offered to me a
 Christian King, paral- leled with Infidels, reputed worse then a Turke, taken for an vsurper
 of my King- domes, reckoned a Prince, to whom subiects owe a forced obedience by way of
 prouision, vntill they shall haue meanes to shake off the yoke, and to bare my temples of the
 Crowne, which neuer can be pulled from the sacred Head, but with losse of the head it selfe ? 
 Touching the warres vndertaken by the French, English , and Germaines , in their expedition for Ierusalem, it appeares by the issue and
 euent of the said warres, that God approoued them not for honourable. That expedition was a
 deuise and inuention of the Pope, whereby he might come to be infeoffed in the Kingdomes of
 Christian Princes.. For then all such of the French, English , or Germaines , as vndertooke the Croisade, became the Popes meere vassals.
 Then all robbers by the high way side, adulterers, cutthroats, and base bankerupts, were
 exempted from the Secular and Ciuill power, their causes were sped in Con- sistorian Courts,
 so soone as they had gotten the Crosse on their cassocks or coat- armours, and had vowed to
 serue in the expedition for the Leuant. Then for the Popes pleasure and at his commaundement,
 whole countryes were emptied of their Nobles and common souldiers. Then they made long marches
 into the Leuant: For what purpose ? Onely to die vpon the points of the Saracens pikes, or by the edge of their barbarous courtelasses, battle-axes, fauchions,
 and other weapons, without any benefit and aduantage to themselues or others. Then the Nobles
 were driuen to sell their goodly Mannors, and auncient demaines to the Church-men, at vnder
 prises and low rates; the very roote from which a great part of the Church and Church-mens
 reuenewes hath sprung and growne to so great height. Then, to be short, his most bountifull
 Holiness gaue to any of the riffe-raffe-rank, that would vndertake this
 expedition into the Holy land, a free and full pardon for all his sinnes, besides a degree of
 glory aboue the vulgar in the Celestial Paradise. Military vertue, I confesse, is commendable
 and honourable; prouided it bee employed for iustice, and that generous noblenesse of valiant
 spirits bee not vnder a colour and shadow of piety, fetcht ouer with some casts or deuises of
 Italian cunning. 
 
 Now let vs obserue the wisedome of the Lord Cardinall through this whole discourse. His
 Lordship is pleased in his Oration, to cite certaine few passages of Scripture, culls and
 picks them out for the most gracefull in shewe: leues out of his whole troupes of honourable
 witnesses, vpon whose testimonie, the Popes themselues and their principall adherents doe
 build his power to depose Kings, and to giue order for all Temporall causes. Take a sight of
 their best and most honourable witnesses. Peter said to Christ, See here two swords ; and Christ answered, It is
 sufficient . Christ said to Peter, Put vp thy sword into thy
 sheath. God said to Ieremie, 
 I haue established thee ouer Nations and Kingdomes. Paul said to the Corinthians, The spirituall man discerneth all things . Christ said to his Apostles, Whatsoeuer yee shall loose vpon earth : by which words the Pope hath power
 forsooth to loose the oath of allegiance. Moses said, In the beginning God created the heauen and the earth . Vpon these passages, Pope Boniface 8. grapling and tugging with Philip the
 Faire, doth build his Temporall power. Other Popes and Papists auouch the
 like authorities. Christ said of himself, All things are giuen to me of my
 Father, and all power is giuen vnto me in heauen and in earth . The Deuils said, If thou cast vs out, send vs into this herd of swine . Christ said to his
 Disciples, Yee shall finde the colt of an asse bound, loose it and bring it
 vnto me . By these places the aduersaries prooue, that Christ disposed of Temporall
 matters; and inferre thereupon, why not Christs Vicar as well as Christ himselfe. The places
 and testimonies now following are very expresse: In stead of thy fathers
 shall be thy children: thou shalt make them Princes through all the earth . Item, Iesus Christ not onely commaunded Peter to feed his lambs ; but said also to Peter, Arise, kill, and eat : the pleasant glosse, the rare inuention of the L. Cardinall Baronius . Christ said to the people, If I were lift vpfrom the earth,
 I will draw all things vnto me . Who lets, what hinders this place from fitting the Pope
 ? Paul said to the Corinthians, Know ye not that we
 shall iudge the Angels ? how much more then the things that pertaine vnto this life ? A
 little after, Haue not we power to eate ? These are the chiefe
 passages, on which as vpon maine arches, the roofe of Papall Monarchie, concerning Temporall
 causes, hath rested for three or foure aages past. And yet his Lordship durst not repose any
 confidence in their firme standing to beare vp the said roofe of Temporall Monarchie, for
 feare of making his auditors to burst with laughter. A wise part without question, if his
 Lordship hath not defiled his lips before, with a more ridiculous argument drawne from the
 leprosie and drie scab. 
 Let vs now by way of comparison behold Iesus Christ paying tribute vnto Caesar , and the Pope making Caesar to pay him tribute: Iesus
 Christ perswading the Iewes to pay tribute vnto an heathen Emperour, and the Pope dispending
 with subiects for their obedience to Christian Emperours: Iesus Christ refusing to arbitrate a
 controuersie of inheritance partable betweene two priuate parties, and the Pope thrusting in
 himselfe without warrant or Commission to bee absolute Iudge in the deposing of
 Kings: Iesus Christ professing that his Kingdome is not of this world, and the Pope
 establishing himselfe in a terrene Empire. In like manner the Apostles forsaking all their
 goods to followe Christ, and the Pope robbing Christians of their goods; the Apostles
 persecuted by Pagan Emperours, and the Pope now setting his foote on the very throate of
 Christian Emperours, then proudly treading Imperiall Crownes vnder his feete. By this
 comparison, the L. Cardinalls allegation of Scripture in fauour of his Master the Pope, is but
 a kind of puppet-play, to make Iesus Christ a mocking stocke, rather then to satisfie his
 auditors with any sound precepts and wholesome instructions. Hereof he seemeth to giue some
 inckling himselfe: For after he hath beene plentifull in citing authorities of Scripture, and
 of newe Doctors, which make for the Popes power to depose Kings; at last he comes in with a
 faire and open confession, that neither by
 diuine Oracles, nor by honourable antiquitie, this controuersie hath beene yet determined: and
 so pulls downe in a word with one hand, the frame of worke that he had built and set vp before
 with an other; discouering withall, the reluctation and priuie checkes of his owne conscience. 
 There yet remaineth one obiection, the knot whereof the L. Cardinall in a maner sweateth to
 vntie. His words be these: 
 The champions for the negatiue flie to the analogie of other proceedings and
 practises in the Church: They affirme that priuate persons, masters or owners of goods and
 possesions among the common people, are not depriued of their goods for Heresie; and
 consequently that Princes much more should not for the same crime bee depriued of their
 estates . For answere to this reason, he brings in the defendants of deposition, speaking
 after this maner; In the Kingdome of France the
 strict execution of lawes decreed in Court against Here- tikes, is fauourably suspended and
 stopped, for the preseruation of peace and publike tranquilitie . He saith elsewhere; Conniuence is vsed towards these Heretikes in regard of their multitude,
 because a notable part of the French Nation and State is made all of Heretikes . I
 suppose that out of speciall charitie, he would haue those Here- tikes of his owne making,
 forewarned what courteous vse and entreaty they are to expect; when he affirmeth that
 execution of the lawes is but suspended: For indeed suspensions hold but for a time. But in a
 cause of that nature and impor- tance, I dare promise my selfe, that my most honoured brother
 the King of France, will make vse of other counsell: will rather seeke
 the amitie of his neighbour Princes, and the peace of his Kingdome: will beare in mind the
 great and faithfull seruice of those, who in matter of religion dissent from his Maiestie, as
 of the onely men that haue preserued and saued the Crowne for the King his father, of most
 glorious memorie. I am perswaded my brother of France wil beleeue, that
 his liege people pretended by the L. Cardinall to bee heretikes, are not halfe so bad as my
 Romane Catholike subiects, who by secret practises vndermine my life, serue a forreine
 Souereigne, are discharged by his Bulls of their obedience due to me their naturall
 Souereigne, are bound (by the maximes and rules published and maintained in
 fauour of the Pope, before this full and famous assemblie of the Estate at
 Paris ; if the said maximes be of any weight and authoritie) to hold meet for no lawfull
 King, are there taught and instructed, that Pauls commande- ment
 concerning subiection vnto the higher Powers, aduerse to their professed religion, is onely a
 prouisionall precept, framed to the times, and watching for the opportunitie to shake off the
 yoake. All which notwithstanding, I deale with such Romane-Catholikes by the rules and wayes
 of Princely clemencie; their heinous and pernicious error, in effect no lesse then the
 capitall crime of high treason, I vse to call some disease or distemper of the mind. Last of
 all, I beleeue my said brother of France will set downe in his tables,
 as in record, how little hee standeth ingaged to the L. Cardinall in this behalfe: For those
 of the reformed Religion professe and proclaime, that next vnder God, they owe
 theirpreseruation and safetie to the wisedome and benignity of their Kings. But now comes the
 Cardinall, and he seekes to steale this perswasion out of their hearts: He tells them in open
 Parliament, and without any going about bushes, that all their wel- fare and securitie
 standeth in their multitude, and in the feare which others con- ceiue to trouble the State, by
 the strict execution of lawes against Heretikes. 
 He addeth moreouer, that In case a third Sect should peepe out and growe
 vp in France, the professors thereof should suffer confiscation of
 their goods, with losse of life it selfe; as hath bene practised at Geneua against Seruetus, and in England against Arians. My answer is this, That punishments for heretikes, duely and according
 to Law conuicted, are set downe by decrees of the ciuill Magistrate, bearing rule in the
 countrey where the said heretikes inhabite, and not by any ordinances of the Pope. I say
 withall, the L. Cardinall hath no reason to match and parallell the reformed Churches with Seruetus and the Arians : For those heretikes were
 powerfully conuicted by Gods word, and lawfully condemned by the ancient Generall Councils,
 where they were permitted and admitted to plead their owne cause in person. But as for the
 trewth professed by me, and those of the reformed Religion, it was neuer yet hissed out of the
 Schooles, nor cast out of any Council, (like some Parliament bills) where both sides haue bene
 heard with like indifferencie. Yea, what Council soeuer hath bene offered vnto vs in these
 latter times, it hath bene proposed with certaine presuppositions: as, That his Holinesse
 (beeing a partie in the cause, and consequently to come vnder iudge- ment as it were to the
 barre vpon his triall) shall be the Iudge of Assize with Commission of Oyer and Determiner : it shall been celebrated in a citie of no
 safe accesse, without safe conduct or conuoy to come or goe at pleasure, and without danger:
 it shall be assembled of such persons with free suffrage and voyce, as vphold this rule,
 (which they haue already put in practise against Iohn Hus and Hierome of Prage ) that faith giuen, and oath taken
 to an Heretike, must not be obserued. 
 Now then to resume our former matter; If the Pope hitherto hath neuer pre- sumed, for
 pretended heresie to confiscate by sentence, either the lands or the goods of
 priuate persons, or common people of the French Nation, wherefore should hee dare to
 dispossesse Kings of their Royall thrones ? wherefore takes he more vpon him ouer Kings, then
 ouer priuate persons; wherefore shall the sacred heads of Kings be more churlishly, vnciuilly,
 and rigorously handled, then the hoods of the meanest people ? Here the L. Cardinal in stead
 of a direct answer, breakes out of the lists, alledging cleane from the purpose examples of
 heretikes punished, not by the Pope, but by the ciuill Magistrate of the Countrey: But Bellarmine speakes to the point with a more free and open heart: hee is
 absolute and resolute in this opinion, that his Holinesse hath plenary power to dispose all
 Temporall estates and matters in the whole world; I am confident (saith
 Bellar- mine ) and I speake it with assurance, that our Lord Iesus Christ in the dayes of his mortalitie, had power to dispose of all Temporall things
 yea, to strip Souereigne Kings and absolute Lords of their Kingdomes and Seignories: and
 without all doubt hath granted and left euen the same power vnto his Vicar, to make vse
 thereof when- soeuer hee shall thinke it necessary for the saluation of soules . And so
 his Lordship speaketh without exception of any thing at all: For who doth not know, that lesus Christ had power to dispose no lesse of priuate mens possessions,
 then of whole Realmes and Kingdomes at his pleasure, if it had beene his pleasure to display
 the ensignes of his power ? The same fulnesse of power is likewise in the Pope. In good time:
 belike his Holinesse is the sole heire of Christ, in whole and in part. The last Lateran
 Council fineth a Laic that speaketh
 blasphemie, for the first offence (if he be a gentleman) at 25. ducats, and at 50. for the
 second. It presupposeth and taketh it for graunted, that the Church may rifle and ran- sacke
 the purses of priuate men, and cast lots for their goods. The Councill of Trent diggeth as deepe for the same veine of gold and siluer. It ordaines; 
 That Emperours, Kings, Dukes, Princes, and Lords of cities, castles, and
 territories hold- ing of the Church, in case they shall. assigne any place within their
 limits or liberties for the duell betweene two Christians, shall be depriued of the said
 citie, castle, or place, where such duell shall be performed, they holding the said place of
 the Church by any kind of tenure: that all other Estates held in fee where the like offence
 shall be committed, shall forthwith fall and become forfeited to their immediate and next
 Lords: that all goods, possessions, and estates, as well of the combatants themselues, as of
 their seconds shall bee confiscate . This Councill doeth necessarily presuppose, it lieth
 in the hand and power of the Church, to dispose of all the lands and estates, held in fee
 throughout all Christendome; (because the Church forsooth can take from one, and giue vnto an
 other all estates held in fee whatsoeuer, as well such as hold of the Church, as of secular
 Lords) and to make ordinances for the confisca- tion of all priuate persons goods. By this
 Canon the Kingdome of Naples hath need to looke well vnto it selfe. For
 one duell it may fall into the Exchecquer of the Romane Church; because that Kingdome payeth a
 Reliefe to the Church, as a Royaltie or Seignorie that holdeth in fee of the said Church. And
 in France 
 there is not one Lordship, not one Mannor, not one farme which the Pope by this
 meanes cannot shift ouer to a new Lord. His Lordship therefore had carried him- selfe and the
 cause much better, if in stead of seeking such idle shifts, he had by a more large assertion
 maintained the Popes power to dispose of priuate mens possessions, with no lesse right and
 authoritie then of Kingdomes: For what colour of reason can bee giuen, for making the Pope
 Lord of the whole, and not of the parts ? for making him Lord of the forrest in grosse, and
 not of the trees in parcell ? for making him Lord of the whole house, and not of the parlour
 or the dining chamber ? 
 His Lordship alleadgeth yet an other reason, but of no better weight: Betweene the power of priuate owners ouer their goods, and the power of Kings ouer their
 estates, there is no little difference: For the goods of priuate persons are ordained for
 their owners, and Princes for the benefit of their Common-wealths . Heare me now answere.
 If this Cardinal-reason hath any force to inferre, that a King may law- fully be depriued of
 his Kingdome for heresie, but a priuate person cannot for the same crime be turned out of his
 mansion house; then it shall follow by the same reason, that a Father for the same cause may
 bee depriued of all power ouer his children, but a priuate owner cannot be depriued of his
 goods in the like case: because goods are ordeined for the benefit and comfort of their
 owners, but fathers are ordeined for the good and benefit of their children: But most certain
 it is, that Kings representing the image of God in earth and Gods place, haue better and
 closer seate in their chaires of Estate, then any priuate persons haue in the saddle of their
 inheritances and patrimonies, which are dayly seene for sleight causes, to flit and to fall
 into the hands of new Lords: Whereas a Prince being the Head, cannot bee loosed in the proper
 ioynt, not dismounted; like a cannon when the carriage thereof is vnlockt, without a sore
 shaking and a most grieuous disloca- tion of all the members, yea, without subuerting the
 whole bodie of the State, whereby priuate persons without number are inwrapped together in the
 same ruine; euen as the lower shrubs and other brush-wood are crushed in pieces alto- gether
 by the fall of a great oake. But suppose his Lordships reason were some- what ponderous and
 solide withall, yet a King (which would not bee forgotten) is endowed not onely with the
 Kingdome, but also with the ancient Desmenes and Crowne-lands, for which none can be so simple
 to say, The King was ordeined and created King; which neuerthelesse he loseth when hee loseth
 his Crowne. Admit againe this reason were of some pith, to make mighty Kings more easily de-
 poseable then priuate persons from their patrimonies; yet all this makes nothing for the
 deriuing and fetching of deposition from the Popes Consistorie. What hee neuer conferred, by
 what right or power can he claime to take away ? 
 But see heere no doubt a sharpe and subtile difference put by the L. Cardinall betweene a
 Kingdome, and the goods of priuate persons. Goods , as his Lordship
 saith, are without life: they can be constrained by no force, by no example,
 by no inducement of their owners to lose eternall life: Subiects by their Princes may .
 Now I am of the contrary beliefe, That an hereticall owner, or master of a
 family, hath greater power and meanes withall, to seduce his owne seruants and children, then
 a Prince hath to peruert his own subiects; and yet for the contagion of Heresie, and for
 corrupt religion, children are not remoued from their parents, nor seruants are taken away
 from their masters. Histories abound with examples of most flourishing Churches, vnder a
 Prince of contrary religion. And if things without life or soule are with lesse danger left in
 an heretikes hands; why then shall not an hereticall King with more facilitie and lesse danger
 keepe his Crowne, his Royall charge, his lands, his customes, his imposts, &c ? For will
 any man, except he bee out of his wits, affirme these things to haue any life or soule ? Or
 why shall it bee counted folly to leaue a sword in the hand of a mad Bedlam ? Is not a sword
 also without life and soule ? For my part, I should rather be of this minde; that possession
 of things without reason, is more dangerous and pernicious in the hands of an euill master,
 then the possession of things endued with life and reason: For things without life lacke both
 reason and iudgment, how to exempt and free themselues from being instruments in euill and
 wicked actions, from being emploied to vngodly and abominable vses. I will not deny, that an
 hereti- call Prince is a plague, a pernicious and mortall sickenesse to the soules of his
 subiects: But a breach made by one mischiefe, must not bee filled vp with a greater
 inconuenience: An errour must not be shocked and shouldered with disloialtie, not heresie with
 periurie, not impietie with sedition and armed rebel- lion against GOD and the King. GOD, who
 vseth to try and to schoole his Church, will neuer forsake his Church; nor hath need to
 protect his Church by any pro- ditorious and prodigious practises of perfidious Christians:
 For he makes his Church to be like the burning bush: In the middest of the fire and flames of
 per- secutions, hee will prouide that she shall not be consumed, because hee standeth in the
 midst of his Church. And suppose there may be some iust cause for the French, to play the
 rebels against their King; yet will it not follow, that such rebellious motions are to be
 raised by the bellowes of the Romane Bishop, to whose Pastorall charge and office it is
 nothing proper, to intermeddle in the ciuill affaires of forraine Kingdomes. 
 Here is the summe and substance of the L. Cardinals whole discourse, touching his pretence
 of the second inconuenience. Which discourse hee hath closed with a remarkeable confession: to
 wit, that neither by the authoritie of holy Scripture, nor by the the testimonie and verdict
 of the Primitiue Church, there hath bene any full decision of this question. In regard whereof
 he falleth into admiration, that Lay-people haue gone so farre in audaciousnesse, as to labour
 that a doubt- full doctrine might for euer passe currant, and be taken for a new article of
 faith. What a shame, what a reproach is this ? how full of scandall ?
 for so his Lordship is pleased to cry out. This breakes into the seueralls
 and inclosures of the Churche: this lets in whole herds of heresies to grase in her greene
 and sweet pastures . On the other side, without any such Rhetoricall outcries, I simply
 affirme: It is a re- proach, a scandall, a crime of rebellion, for a subiect
 hauing his full charge and loade of benefits, in the new spring of his Kings tender aage, his
 King-fathers blood yet reeking, and vpon the point of an addresse for a double match with
 Spaine; in so honourable an assembly, to seeke the thraldome of his Kings Crowne, to play the
 captious in cauilling about causes of his Kings deposing, to giue his former life the Lye with
 shame enough in his old aage, and to make him- selfe a common by-word, vnder the name of a Problematicall Martyr ; one that offers himselfe to fagot and fire, for a
 point of doctrine but problematically handled, that is, distrustfully and onely by way of
 doubtfull and questionable dis- course: yea for a point of doctrine, in which the French (as
 he pretendeth) are permitted to thwart and crosse his Holines in iudgement, prouided they
 speake in it as in a point, not certaine and necessary, but onely doubtfull and probable.

THE THIRD INCONVENIENCE EXAMINED. 

 THE third Inconuenience pretended by the L. Cardinall to grow by admitting this Article of the third Estate, is flourished in these
 colours: It would breed and bring foorth an open and vnauoydeable schisme
 against his Holinesse, and the rest of the whole Ecclesiasticall body: For thereby the
 doctrine long approued and ratified by the Pope and the rest of the Church, should now be
 taxed and condemned of impious and most detestable consequence; yea the Pope and the Church,
 euen in faith and in points of saluation, should be reputed and beleeued to be erroniously
 per- swaded . Hereupon his Lordship giues himselfe a large scope of the raines, to frame
 his elegant amplifications against schismes and schismatikes. 
 Now to mount so high, and to flie in such place vpon the wings of amplifica- tion for this
 Inconuenience, what is it else but magnifically to report and imagine a mischiefe by many
 degrees greater then the mischiefe is ? The L. Cardinal is in a great errour, if hee make
 himselfe beleeue, that other nations wil make a rent or separation from the communion of the
 French, because the French stand to it tooth and naile, that French Crownes are not liable or
 obnoxious to Papall de- position; howsoeuer there is no schisme that importeth not separation
 of com- munion. The most illustrious Republike of Venice , hath imbarked
 hereselfe in this quarrell against his Holinesse, hath played her prize, and caried away the
 weapons with great honour. Doeth she, notwithstanding her triumph in the cause, forbeare to
 participate with all her neighbours in the same Sacraments ? doeth she liue in schisme with
 all the rest of the Romane Church ? No such matter. When the L. Cardinal himselfe not many
 yeeres past, maintained the Kings cause, and stood honourably for the Kings right against the
 Popes Tem- porall vsurpations, did he then take other Churches to be schismaticall, or the
 rotten members of Antichrist ? Beleeue it who list, I beleeue my Creed.
 Nay his Lordship telleth vs himselfe a little after, that his Holinesse giues the French free scope, to maintaine either the affimatiue or negatiue of this question. And
 will his Holinesse hold them schismatikes, that dissent from his opinion and iudgement in a
 subiect or cause esteemed problematicall ? Farre be it from his Holinesse. The King of Spaine,
 reputed the Popes right arme, neuer gaue the Pope cause by any acte or other declaration, to
 conceiue that he acknowledged himselfe deposeable by the Pope for heresie, or Tyrannie, or
 stupiditie. But being well assured the Pope standeth in greater feare of his arme, then hee
 doeth of the Popes head and shoulders, he neuer troubles his owne head about our question.
 More, when the booke of Cardinall Baronius was come foorth, in which
 booke the Kingdome of Naples is descried and publiquely discredited (like false money)
 touching the qualitie of a Kingdome, and attributed to the King of Spaine, not as trew
 proprietary thereof, but onely as an Estate held in fee of the Romane Church; the King made no
 bones to condemne and to banish the said booke out of his dominions. The holy Father was
 contented to put vp his Catho- like sonnes proceeding to the Cardinals disgrace, neuer opened
 his mouth against the King, neuer declared or noted the King to be schismaticall. He waits
 perhaps for some fitter opportunitie; when the Kingdome of Spaine groaning vnder the burthens
 of intestine dissentions and troubles, hee may without any danger to himselfe giue the
 Catholike King a Bishops mate. Yea, the L. Cardinal himselfe is better seene in the humors and
 inclinations of the Christian world, then to be grosly perswaded, that in the Kingdome of
 Spaine, and in the very heart of Rome it selfe there be not many, which either make it but a
 ieast, or else take it in fowle scorne, to heare the Popes power ouer the Crownes of Kings
 once named: espe- cially since the Venetian Republic hath put his Holinesse to the worse in
 the same cause, and cast him in Law. 
 What needed the L. Cardinall then, by casting vp such mounts and trenches, by heaping one
 amplification vpon an other, to make schisme looke with such a terrible and hideous aspect ?
 Who knowes not how great an offence, how heinous a crime it is to quarter not IESVS CHRISTS
 coat, but his body, which is the Church ? And what needed such terrifying of the Church with
 vglinesse of schisme, whereof there is neither colourable shew, nor possibilitie ? 
 The next vgly monster, after schisme, shaped by the L. Cardinall in the third supposed and pretended inconuenience, is heresie.
 His Lordship saith for the purpose: By this Article we are cast headlong
 into a manifest heresie, as binding vs to confesse, that for many aages past, the Catholike
 Church hath bene banished out of the whole world. For if the champions of the doctrine
 contrary to this Article, doe hold an impious and a detestable opinion, repugnant vnto Gods
 word, then doubtlesse the Pope for so many hundred yeeres expired, hath not bene the head of
 the Church, but an heretike and the Antichrist . He addeth moreouer; That the Church long agoe hath lost her name of Catholike, and that in France there hath no
 Church flourished, nor so much as appeared these many and more then many yeeres: for as much
 as all 
 
 the French doctors for many yeeres together, haue stood for the contrary
 opinion. We can erect and set vp no trophey more honorable for heretikes in token of their
 victory, then to auow that Christs visible Kingdom is perished from the face of the earth,
 and that for so many hundred yeres that there hath not beene any Temple of God, nor any
 spouse of Christ, but euery where, and all the world ouer, the kingdom of Antichrist, the
 synagogue of Satan, the spouse of the diuel, hath mightily preuailed and borne all the sway.
 Lastly, what stronger engines can these heretikes wish or desire, for the battering and the
 demolishing of transubstantiation, of auricular confession, and other like towers of our
 Catholike Religion, then if it should bee granted the Church hath decided the said points
 without any authoritie ? &c. 
 
 Mee thinkes the L. Cardinal in the whole draught and course of these words doeth seeke not a
 little to blemish the honour of his Church, and to marke his religion with a blacke coale: For
 the whole frame of his Mother-Church is very easie to be shaken, if by the establishing of
 this Article she shall come to finall ruine, and shall become the Synagogue of Satan.
 Likewise, Kings are brought into a very miserable state and condition, if their Souereigntie
 shall not stand, if they shall not bee without danger of deposition, but by the totall ruine
 of the Church, and by holding the Pope, whom they serue, to be Antichrist. The L. Cardinall
 himselfe (let him be well sifted) herein doeth not credit his owne words: For doeth not his
 Lordship tell vs plaine, that neither by Diuine testimony, nor by any sentence of the ancient
 Church, the knot of this controuersie hath bene vntied? againe, that some of the French, by
 the Popes fauourable indulgence, are licensed or tolerated to say their mind, to deliuer their
 opinion of this question, though contrary to the iudgement of his Holinesse; prouided they
 hold it onely as problematicall, and not as necessary ? What ? Can there be any assurance for
 the Pope, that hee is not Antichrist; for the Church of Rome, that she
 is not a Synagogue of Satan, when a mans assurance is grounded vpon wauering and wilde
 vncertainties, without Canon of Scripture, without consent or countenance of antiquitie, and
 in a cause which the Pope by good leaue suffereth some to tosse with winds of problematicall
 opinion ? It hath beene shewed before, that by Gods word, whereof small reckoning perhaps is
 made, by venerable antiquitie, and by the French Church in those times when the Popes power
 was mounted aloft, the doctrine which teacheth deposing of Kings by the Pope, hath bene
 checked and countermanded. What, did the French in those dayes beleeue the Church was then
 swallowed vp, and no where visible or extant in the world ? No verely; Those that make the
 Pope of Soueraigne authoritie for matters of Faith, are not perswaded that in this cause they
 are bound ab- solutely to beleeue and credit his doctrine. Why so ? Because they take it not
 for any decree or determination of Faith; but for a point perteining to the mys- teries of
 State, and a pillar of the Popes Temporall Monarchie; who hath not receiued any promise from
 God, that in causes of this nature hee shall not erre: For they hold, that errour by no meanes
 can crawle or scramble vp to the Papall See, so highly mounted; but grant
 ambition can scale the highest walls, and climbe the loftiest pinacles of the same See. They
 hold withall, that in case of so speciall aduantage to the Pope, whereby he is made King of
 Kings, and as it were the pay-master or distributer of Crownes, it is against all reason that
 hee should sit as Iudge, to carue out Kingdomes for his owne share. To bee short, let his
 Lordship be assured that he meeteth with notorious blockeheads, more blunt- witted then a
 whetstone, when they are drawne to beleeue by his perswasion, that whosoeuer beleeues the Pope
 hath no right nor power to put Kings beside their Thrones, to giue and take away Crownes, are
 all excluded and barred out of the heauenly Kingdome. 
 But now followes a worse matter: For they whom the Cardinall reproachfully calls heretikes,
 haue wrought and wonne his Lordship (as to mee seemeth) to plead their cause at the barre, and
 to betray his owne cause to these heretikes: For what is it in his Lordship, but plaine
 playing the Praeuaricator, when he crieth so lowd, that by admitting and establishing of this
 Article, the doctrine of Cake-incarnation and priuie Confession to a Priest, is vtterly
 subuerted ? Let vs heare his reason, and willingly accept the trewth from his lips. The
 Articles (as his Lordship granteth) of Transubstantiation, auricular Confession, and the Popes
 power to depose Kings, are all grounded alike vpon the same authoritie. Now he hath
 acknowledged the Article of the Popes power to depose Kings, is not decided by the Scripture,
 not by the ancient Church, but within the compasse of certaine aages past, by the authoritie
 of Popes and Councils. Then he goes on well, and inferres with good reason, that in case the
 point of the Popes power be weakened, then the other two points must needs bee shaken, and
 easily ouer- throwen: So that hee doeth confesse the monstrous birth of the breaden-God, and
 the blind Sacrament or vaine fantasie of auricular confession, are no more con- ueyed into the
 Church by pipes from the springs of sacred Scripture, or from the riuers of the ancient
 Church, then that other point of the Popes power ouer Kings and their Crownes. Very good: For
 were they indeed deriued from either of those two heads, that is to say, were they grounded
 vpon the foundation of the first or second authoritie; then they could neuer bee shaken by the
 downefall of the Popes power to depose Kings. I am well assured, that for vsing so good a
 reason, the world will hold his Lordship in suspicion, that he still hath some smacke of his
 fathers discipline and instruction, who in times past had the honour to be a Minister of the
 holy Gospel. 
 Howbeit he playeth not faire, nor vseth sincere dealing in his proceeding against such as he
 calls heretikes; when hee casts in their dish, and beares them in hand they frowardly wrangle
 for the inuisibilitie of the Church in earth: For indeed the matter is nothing so. They freely
 acknowledge a visible Church: For howsoeuer the assembly of Gods elect, doth make a body not
 discerneable by mans eye; yet we assuredly beleeue, and gladly professe, there neuer wanted a
 visible Church in the world; yet onely visible to such as make a part of the same. All that are without, see no more but men, they doe not see the said men to be the trew
 Church. Wee beleeue moreouer of the vniuersall Church visible, that it is composed of many
 particular Churches, whereof some are better fined and more cleane from lees and dregs then
 other: and withall, we denie the purest Churches to be alwayes the greatest and most visible.

THE FOVRTH AND LAST INCONVENIENCE EXAMINED. 

 THE Lord Cardinall before he looketh into the last Inconuenience, vseth a cer- taine
 preamble of his owne life past, and seruices done to the Kings, Henry 
 the III. and IIII. Touching the latter of which two Kings, his Lordship saith in a straine of
 boasting, after this manner: I, by the grace of God, or the grace of God by
 mee rather, reduced him to the Catholike religion. I obtained at Rome his absolution of Pope
 Clement 8. I reconciled him to the holy See . Touching the first of these points; I say
 the time, the occasions, and the foresaid Kings necessary affaires doe sufficiently testifie,
 that he was induced to change his mind, and to alter his religion, vpon the strength of other
 manner of arguments then Theological schooles, or the perswasions of the L. Cardinals fluent
 Rhetoricke, doe vsually afford, or could possibly suggest. Moreouer, who doeth not know, that
 in affaires of so high nature and consequence, resolutions once taken, Princes are to pro-
 ceede with instructions by a formal course ? As for the Kings absolution, pre- tended to bee
 purchased of Clement 8. by the L. Cardinals good seruice; it had beene
 the part of so great a Cardinall, for the honour of his King, of the Realme, and of his owne
 place, to haue buried that piece of his notable seruice in perpetuall silence, and in the
 darke night of eternall obliuion: For in this matter of reconcile- ment, it is not vnknowne to
 the world, how shamefully and basely hee prostituted the inuiolable dignity of his King, when
 his Lordship representing the person of his King, and couching on the ground by way of
 sufficient penance, was glad (as I haue noted in the Preface to my Apologie) to haue his
 venerable shoulders grace- fully saluted with stripes, and reuerently worshipped with
 bastonados of a Ponti- ficiall cudgell. Which gracefull, or disgracefull blemish rather, it
 pleased Pope Clement of his rare clemencie, to grace yet with a higher
 degree of spirituall graces; in giuing the L. Cardinall then Bishop of Eureux , a certaine quantity of holy graines, crosses, and medals, or little plates of
 siluer, or some other mettall, to hang about the necke, or to bee borne about against some
 euill: Which treasures of the Popes grace, whosoeuer should graciously and reuerently kisse,
 they should with- out faile purchase vnto themselues a pardon for one hundred yeeres. These
 feate and prety gugawes for children, were nor doubt a speciall comfort vnto the good Kings
 heart, after his Maiestie had beene handsomely basted vpon the L. Bishops backe. But with what
 face can his Lordship brag, that he preuailed with Pope Clement for the
 Kings absolution ? The late Duke of Neuers , not long before had
 solicited his Holines, with all earnest and humble instance to the same purpose; 
 howsoeuer, the Kings affaires then seeming desperate in the Popes eye, he was licensed to
 depart for France , without any due and gracious respect vnto his
 errand. But so soone as the Pope receiued intelligence, of the Kings fortunes growing to the
 full, and the affaires of the League to be in the wane, and the prin- cipall cities, the
 strongest places of garrison through all France to strike tops and tops
 gallant, and to hale the King; then the holy Ghost in good time inspired the holy Father with
 a holy desire and tender affection, to receiue this poore wandring sheep againe into the
 flocke of Christ, and bosome of holy Church. His Holinesse had reason: For he feared by his
 obstinate seuerity to prouoke the patience of the French, and to driue that Nation (as they
 had many times threatned before) then to put in execution their auncient designe; which was,
 to shake off the Pope, and to set vp some of their owne tribes or kinreds for Patriarch ouer
 the French Church. But let his Lordshippe vouchsafe to search the secret of his owne bosome,
 and no doubt he wil not sticke to acknowledge, that before he stirred one foote out of France , he had good assurance of the good successe and issue of his
 honourable embassage. 
 Now the hearers thus prepared by his Preface, the L. Cardinall proceedeth in his purpose;
 namely to make proofe, how this Article of the third Estate, wherein doubtfull and
 questionable matters are mingled and confounded with certaine and indubitable principles, doth
 so debilitate and weaken the sinewes and vertue of any remedy intended for the danger of
 Kings, as it maketh all remedies and receipts prescribed for that purpose, to become
 altogether vnprofitable, and with- out effect. He yeelds this reason, (take it forsooth vpon
 my warrant) a reason full of pith and substance: The onely remedie against parricides, is to
 thunder the solemne curses of the Church, and the punishments to be inflicted after death:
 which points, if they be not grounded vpon infallible authoritie, will neuer be setled in mens
 perswasions with any certaine assurance. Now in the solemne curses of the Church, no man can
 attaine to the said assurance, if things not denied be mingled with points not graunted, and
 not consented vnto by the Vniuersall Church. By a thing not denied and not contested, the L.
 Cardinall meanes prohibiting and condemning of King-killing: and by points contested, he
 meanes denying of the Popes power to depose Kings. 
 In this whole discourse, I find neither pith of argument, nor course of proofe; but onely a
 cast of the L. Cardinalls office by way of counsell: whereunto I make this answere. If there
 be in this Article of the third Estate any point, wherein all are not of one mind and the same
 iudgement; in whom lieth all the blame, from whence rises the doubt, but from the Popes and
 Popish parasites, by whom the certaintie of the said point hath bin cunningly remooued and
 conueied away, and must be restored againe by publike authority ? Now the way to restore
 certainty vnto a point, which against reason is called into doubt and question, is to make it
 vp in one masse, or to tie it vp in the same bundle, with other certaine points of the same
 nature. 
 
 Here I am forced to summon the consciences of men, to make some stand or stay vpon this
 point, and with me to enter into deepe consideration, how great and vnuanquishable force is
 euer found in the trewth: For these two questions, Whether Kings may lawfully be made away by
 assassins waged and hired for the act; and Whether the Pope hath lawfull power to chase Kings
 out of their Thrones, are by the L. Cardinals owne confession, in so full aspect of
 coniunction, that if either bee brought vnder any degree of doubt, the other also is fetcht
 within the same compasse. In which words he directly pointeth as with a finger to the very
 trew source of the maine mischiefe, and to the basilique and liuer veine, infected with
 pestilential blood, inflamed to the destruction of Basilicall Princes by detestable parricide:
 For whosoeuer shall confidently beleeue that Popes are not armed with power to depose Kings;
 will beleeue with no lesse con- fidence and assurance, it is not lawful by sudden assaults to
 flie at their throats. For are not all desperate villaines perswaded, when they are hired to
 murder Kings, that in doing so damnable a feate, they doe it for a piece of notable and
 extraordinary seruice to the Pope ? This maxime therefore is to be held for a principle
 vnmooueable and indubitable; that, If subiects desire the life of their Kings to bee secured;
 they must not yeeld the Pope one inch of power, to depriue their Kings of their Thrones and
 Crownes, by deposing their Kings. 
 The Lord Cardinall testifieth no lesse himselfe in these words: If those
 monsters of men, and furies of hell, by whom the life-blood of our two last Kings was let out
 had euer beene acquainted with Lawes Ecclesiasticall, they might haue read them- selues
 adiudged by the Councill of Constance to expresse damnation . For in these words, the L.
 Cardinall preferreth a bill of inditement to cast his Holinesse; who, vpon the commencing of
 the Leaguers warres, in stead of giuing order for the publishing of the said Ecclesiasticall
 Lawes for the restraining of all parricidicall practises and attempts, fell to the terrour of
 his fulminations, which not long after were seconded and ratified by the most audatious and
 bloody murder of King Henry III. In like manner, the whole Clergy of
 France are wrapped vp by the L. Cardinals words, and inuolued in the
 perill of the said inditement: For in stead of preaching the said Ecclesiasticall Lawes, by
 which all King-killing is inhibited; the Priests taught, vented, and published nothing but
 rebellion; and when the people in great deuotion came to powre their confessions into the
 Priests eares; then the Priests, with a kind of counterbuffe in the second place when their
 turne was come, and with great deuotion, powred blood into the eares of the people; out of
 which roote grewe the terrour of those cruell warres, and the horrible parricide of that good
 King. 
 But let vs here take some neere sight of these Ecclesiasticall Lawes, whereby subiects are
 inhibited to kill, or desperately to dispatch their Kings out of the way. The Lord Cardinall,
 for full payment of all scores vpon this reckoning, layeth downe the credit of the Councill at
 Constance , which neuerthelesse affoardeth not one myte of trew and
 currant payment. The trewth of the history may bee taken from this briefe
 relation. Iohn Duke of Burgundy, procured Lewis 
 Duke of Orleans to be murthered in Paris: To iustifie and make good this bloody acte, he
 produced a certaine petimaster, one called by the name of Iohn Petit .
 This little Iohn caused nine propositions to be giuen foorth or set vp, to bee discussed in
 the famous Vniuersitie of Paris: The summe of all to this purpose; It is lawfull, iust, and
 honourable, for euery subiect or priuate person either by open force and violence, or by
 deceit and secret lying in waite, or by some wittie stratagem, or by any other way of fact, to
 kil a Tyrant practising against his King, and other higher powers; yea the King ought in
 reason, to giue him a pension or stipend, that hath killed any person disloyal to his Prince.
 The words of Petits first pro- position be these: 
 It is lawfull for euery subiect, without any command or com- mission from
 the higher powers by all the Lawes of nature, of man, and of God him- selfe, to kill or cause
 to be killed any Tyrant, who either by a couetous and greedie desire, or by fraud, by
 diuination vpon casting of Lots, by double and treacherous dealing, doeth plot or practise
 against his Kings corporall health, or the health of his higher powers . In the third
 proposition: It is lawfull for euery subiect honourable and meritorious, to
 kill the said Tyrant, or cause him to be killed as a Traitor, dis- loyall and trecherous to
 his King . In the sixt proposition: The King is to appoint a salarie
 and recompence for him that hath kilted such a Tyrant, or hath caused him to bee killed .
 These propositions of Iohannes Paruus , were condemned by the Councill
 of Constance, as impious, and tending to the scandall of the Church. Now then, whereas the
 said Councill no doubt vnderstood the name or word Tyrant in the same sense, wherein it was
 taken by Iohannes Paruus ; certaine it is, the Councill was not of any
 such iudgement or mind, to condemne one that should kill a King or Soueraigne Prince; but one
 that by treason, and without commandement should kill a subiect, rebelling and practising
 against his King. For Iohn Petit had vndertaken to iustifie the making
 away of the Duke of Orleans to be a lawfull acte, and calls that Duke a Tyrant, albeit hee was
 no Soueraigne Prince; as all the aboue recited words of Iohn Petit doe
 testifie, that he speaketh of such a Tyrant, as being in state of subiection, rebelleth
 against his free and absolute Prince: So that whosoeuer shall narrowly search and looke into
 the mind and meaning of the said Council, shal easily perceiue, that by their decrees the
 safetie of Kings was not confirmed but weakened, not augmented but dimin- ished; for as much
 as they inhibited priuate persons to kill a Subiect, attempting by wicked counsels and
 practises to make away his King. 
 But be it granted, the Councill of Constance is flat and altogether direct against
 King-killers; For I am not vnwilling to be perswaded, that had the ques- tion then touched the
 murdering of Soueraigne Princes, the said Councill would haue passed a sound and holy decree:
 But, I say, this granted, what shield of defence is hereby reached to Kings, to ward or beat
 off the thrust of a murderers weapon, and to saue or secure their life ? seeing the L.
 Cardinall, building vpon the subtile deuise and shift of the Iesuites, hath
 taught vs out of their Schooles, that by Kings are vnderstood Kings in esse , not yet fallen from the supreame de- gree of Soueraigne Royaltie: For being once
 deposed by the Pope, (say the Iesuites ) they are no longer Kings, but
 are fallen from the rights of Soueraigne dignitie; and consequently to make strip and wast of
 their blood, is not forsooth to make strip and wast of Royall blood. The Iesuiticall masters, in the file of thire words are so supple and so limber, that by
 leauing still in their speech some starting hole or other, they are able by the same, as by a
 posterne or backdoore, to make an escape. 
 Meane while the Readers are here to note (for well they may) a tricke of monstrous and most
 wicked cunning. The L. Cardinall contends for the bridling and hampering of King-killers by
 the Lawes Ecclesiasticall. Now it might be presumed, that so reuerend and learned a Cardinal
 intending to make vse of Ecclesiasticall Lawes, by vertue whereof the life of Kings may be
 secured, would fill his mouth and garnish the point with diuine Oracles, that wee might the
 more gladly and willingly giue him the hearing, when hee speakes as one furnished with
 sufficient weight and authoritie of sacred Scripture. But behold, in stead of the authenticall
 and most ancient word, hee propounds the decree of a lateborne Councill at Constance, neither
 for the Popes tooth, nor any way comming neere the point in controuersie. And suppose it were
 pertinent vnto the purpose, the L. Cardinall beareth in his hand a forke of distinction, with
 two tines or teeth to beare off, nay to shift off and to auoid the matter with meere
 dalliance. The shortest and neerest way (in some sort of respects) to establish a false
 opinion, is to charge or set vpon it with false and with ridiculous reasons. The like way to
 worke the ouerthrow of trew doctrine, is to rest or ground it vpon friuolous rea- sons or
 authorities of stubble-weight. For example; if we should thus argue for the immortalitie of
 the soule with Plato : The swan singeth before her death; ergo , the soule is
 immortall. Or thus with certaine seduced Christians: The Pope hath ordained the word of God to
 be authenticall: ergo , all credit must be giuen to diuine Scripture.
 Vpon the spurkies or hookes of such ridiculous argu- ments and friuolous reasons, the L.
 Cardinall hangs the life and safetie of Kings. 
 With like artificiall deuises hee pretendeth to haue the infamous murders, and apposted
 cutting of Kings throats in extreame detestation; and yet by deposing them from their Princely
 dignities, by degrading them from their supreame and Soueraigne authorities, hee brings their
 sacred heads to the butchers blocke: For a King deposed by the Pope, (let no man doubt) will
 not leaue any stone vnre- mooued, nor any meanes and wayes vnattempted, nor any forces or
 powers of men vnleuied or vnhired, to defend himselfe and his Regall dignitie, to represse and
 bring vnder his rebellious people, by the Pope discharged of their alleagiance. In this
 perplexitie of the publike affaires, in these tempestuous perturbations of the State, with
 what perils is the King not besieged and assaulted ? His head is exposed to the
 chances of warre; his life a faire marke to the insidious practises of a thousand traitours;
 his Royall person obuious to the dreadfull storme of angry fortune, to the deadly malice, to
 the fatall and mortall weapons of his enemies. The reason: He is presupposed to be lawfully
 and orderly stripped of his Kingdome. Wil he yet hold the sterne of his Royall estate ? Then
 is he necessarily taken for a Tyrant, reputed an vsurper, and his life is exposed to the
 spoile: For the publike lawes make it lawful and free, for any priuate person to enterprise
 against an vsurper of the Kingdome: Euery man , saith Tertullian, is a souldier,
 to beare armes against all traitors and publike enemies . Take from a King the title of
 lawfull King, you take from him the warrant of his life, and the weap- ons whereby he is
 maintained in greater securitie, then by his Royall Guard armed with swords and halberds,
 through whose wards and ranks, a desperate villaine will make himselfe an easie passage, being
 master of another mans life, because he is prodigall and carelesse of his owne. Such therefore
 as pretend so much pity towards Kings, to abhorre the bloody opening of their liuer-veine, and
 yet withall, to approoue their hoysting out of the Royall dignity, are iust in the veine and
 humour of those that say, Let vs not kill the King, but let vs disarme the King that he may
 die a violent death: let vs not depriue him of life, but of the meanes to defend his life: let
 vs not strangle the King and stop his vitall breath, so long as he remaineth King; 0 that were
 impious, 0 that were horrible and abominable; but let him be deposed, and then whosoeuer shall
 runne him through the body with a weapon vp to the very hilts, shall not beare the guilt of a
 King-killer. All this must be vnderstood to be spoken of Kings, who after they are despoiled
 of Regalitie, by sentence of deposition giuen by the Pope, are able to arme them- selues, and
 by valiant armes doe defend their Soueraigne rights. But in case the King, blasted with Romane
 lightning, and stricken with Papall thunder, shall actually and speedily bee smitten downe
 from his high Throne of Regality, with present losse of his Kingdome; I beleeue it is almost
 impossible for him to war- rant his owne life, who was not able to warrant his owne Kingdome.
 Let a cat be throwen from a high roofe to the bottom of a cellour or vault, she lighteth on
 her feet, and runneth away without taking any harme. A King is not like a cat, how- soeuer a
 cat may looke vpon a King: he cannot fall from the loftie pinacle of Royalty, to light on his
 feet vpon the hard pauement of a priuate state, without crushing all his bones in pieces. It
 hath bene the lot of very few Emperors and Kings, to outliue their Empire: For men ascend to
 the loftie Throne of Kings, with a soft and easie pace, by certaine steps and degrees; there
 be no stately staires to come downe, they tumble head and heeles together when they fall. He
 that hath once griped anothers Kingdome, thinks himselfe in little safetie, so long as he
 shall of his courtesie suffer his disseised predecessour to draw his breath. And say that some
 Princes, after their fall from their Thrones, haue escaped both point and edge of the Tyrants
 weapon; yet haue they wandred like miserable fugitiues in forreine countreys, or
 else haue bene condemned like captiues to perpetuall imprisonment at home, a thousand-fold
 worse and more lamentable then death it selfe. Dionysius the Tyrant of
 Syracusa , from a great King in Sicilie tur'nd
 Schoolemaster in Corinth . It was the onely calling and kind of life,
 that as he thought bearing some resemblance of rule and gouernment, might recreate his mind,
 as an image or picture of his former Soueraigntie ouer men. This Dionysius was the onely man (to my knowledge) that had a humour to laugh after the
 losse of a Kingdome, and in the state of a Pedant or gouernour of children, merily to ieast
 and to scorne his former state and condition of a King. In this my Kingdome of England , sundry Kings haue seene the walls as it were of their Princely
 fortresse dismantled, razed, and beaten downe. By name, Edward and Richard , both II. and Henrie the VI. all which
 Kings were most cruelly murdered in prison. In the reigne of Edward 
 III. by Acte of Parliament, Who- soeuer shall imagine , (that is the
 very word of the Statute) or machinate the Kings death, are declared guiltie
 of Rebellion and high Treason . The learned Iudges of the Land, grounding vpon this Law
 of Edward the third, haue euer since reputed and iudged them traitors
 according to Law, that haue dared only to whisper or talke softly betweene the teeth, of
 deposing the King: For they count it a cleare case, that no Crowne can be taken from a Kings
 head, without losse of Head and Crowne together, sooner or later. 
 The L. Cardinal therefore in this most
 weightie and serious point doth meerely dally and flowt after a sort, when hee tells vs, The Church doeth not inter- meddle with releasing of subiects, and knocking of
 their yrons of obedience, but onely before the Ecclesiasticall tribunall seat; and that
 besides this double censure, of absolu- tion to subiects, and excommunication to the Prince,
 the Church imposeth none other penaltie. Vnder pretence of which two censures, so farre is
 the Church (as the L. Car- dinall pretendeth) from consenting that any
 man so censured should bee touchedfor his life, that she vtterly abhorreth all murder
 whatsoeuer; but especially all sudden and vnpre- penced murders for feare of casting away
 both body and soule; which often in sudden murders goe both one way . It hath bene made
 manifest before, that all such pro- scription and setting forth of Kings to port-sale, hath
 alwaies for the traine thereof, either some violent and bloody death, or some other mischiefe
 more intolerable then death it selfe. What are we the better, that parricides of Kings are
 neither set on, nor approued by the Church in their abominable actions; when shee layeth such
 plots, and taketh such courses, as necessarily doe inferre the cutting of their throates ? In
 the next place be it noted, that his Lordship against all reason, reckons the absoluing of
 subiects from the oath of alleagiance, in the ranke of penalties awarded and enioyned before
 the Ecclesiasticall tri- bunall seate: For this penaltie is not Ecclesiasticall, but Ciuill,
 and consequently not triable in Ecclesiasticall Courts, without vsurping vpon the Ciuill
 Magistrate. But I wonder with what face the L. Cardinall can say, The Church neuer con- senteth to any practise against his life, whom she hath once chastised with seuere
 censures: For can his Lordship be ignorant, what is written by Pope Vrbanus, Can.
 Excommunicatorum. Wee take them not in any wise to bee man-slayers, who in a certaine heat of
 zeale towards the Catholike Church their Mother, shall happen to kill an excommunicate
 person . More, if the Pope doth not approoue and like the practice of King-killing,
 wherefore hath not his Holinesse imposed some seuere censure vpon the booke of Mariana the Iesuite (by whom parricides are com- mended, nay highly
 extolled) when his Holinesse hath beene pleased to take the paines to censure and call in some
 other of Mariana's bookes ? Againe, wherefore did his Holinesse aduise
 himselfe to censure the Decree of the Court of Parlia- ment in Paris 
 against Iohn Chastell ? Wherefore did hee suffer Garnet and Old- corne my powder-miners, both by bookes and
 pictures vendible vnder his nose in Rome , to be inrowled in the Canon
 of holy Martyrs ? And when hee saw two great Kings murdered one after another, wherefore by
 some publike declaration did not his Holinesse testifie to all Christendome, his inward sense
 and trew ap- prehension of so great misfortune, as all Europe had iust
 cause to lament on the behalfe of France ? Wherefore did not his
 Holinesse publish some Law or Pon- tificiall Decree, to prouide for the securitie of Kings in
 time to come ? Trew it is, that he censured Becanus his booke: But
 wherefore ? That by a captious and sleight censure, he might preuent a more exact and rigorous
 Decree of the Sorbone Schoole: For the Popes checke to Becanus , was onely a generall censure and touch, without any particular
 specification of matter touching the life of Kings. About some two moneths after, the said
 booke was printed againe, with a dedica- tion to the Popes Nuntio in
 Germany ; yet without any alteration, saue onely of two articles
 conteining the absolute power of the people ouer Kings. In recom- pence and for a
 counterchecke whereof, three or foure articles were inserted into the said booke, touching the
 Popes power ouer Kings; articles no lesse wicked & iniurious to Regall rights; nay more
 iniurious then any of the other clauses, whereof iust cause of exception and complaint had
 bene giuen before. If I would collect and heape vp examples of ancient Emperours, (as of Henrie IV . whose dead corps felt the rage and furie of the Pope; or of Frederic II. against whom the Pope was not ashamed to whet and kindle the
 Sultane; or of Queene Elizabeth our Predecessour, of glorious memorie,
 whose life was diuers times assaulted by priuie murderers, expresly dispatched from Rome for that holy seruice) if I would gather vp other examples of the
 same stampe, which I haue layd forth in my Apologie for the oath of alleagiance; I could make
 it more cleare then day-light, how farre the L. Cardinals words are discrepant from the
 trewth, where his Lord- ship out of most
 rare confidence is bold to auow, That neuer any Pope went so farre, as to
 giue consent or counsell for the desperate murdering of Princes . That which already hath
 bene alleadged may suffice to conuince his Lordship: I meane, that his Holinesse by deposing
 of Kings, doeth lead them directly to their graues and tombes. 
 
 The Cardinall himselfe seemeth to take
 some notice hereof. The Church (as he speaketh) abborreth sudden and vnprepensed murders aboue the rest . Doth not his Lordship in this
 phrase of speech acknowledge, that murders committed by open force, are not so much disauowed
 or disclaimed by the Church ? A little after he speakes not in the teeth, as before, but with
 full and open mouth; that hee doeth not dislike a King once deposed by the Pope, should be
 pursued with open warre: Whereupon it followes, that in warre the King may be lawfully slaine.
 No doubt a remarkable degree of his Lordships clemencie. A King shall bee better entreated and
 more mildly dealt withal, if he be slaine by the shot of an harquebuse or caleeuer in the
 field, then if hee bee stabd by the stroke or thrust of a knife in his chamber: or if at a
 siege of some city hee be blowne vp with a myne, then by a myne made, and a traine of
 gunpowder laid vnder his Palace or Parliament house in time of peace. His reason: Forsooth,
 because in sudden murders, oftentimes the soule and the body perish both together. O singular
 bountie, and rare clemencie! prouokers, instigators, strong puffers and blowers of parricides,
 in mercifull compassion of the soule, become vnmercifull and shamefull murderers of the body.
 This deuice may well claime and challenge kinred of Mariana the Iesuites inuention: For he liketh not at any hand the poisoning of a
 Tyrant by his meat or drinke; for feare lest he taking the poison with his owne hand, and
 swallowing or gulping it downe in his meate or drinke so taken, should be found felo de se , (as the common Lawyer speaketh) or culpable of his owne death.
 But Mariana likes better, to haue a Tyrant poysoned by his chaire, or
 by his apparell and robes, after the example of the Mauritanian Kings;
 that being so poysoned onely by sent, or by contact, he may not be found guiltie of selfe-
 fellonie, and the soule of the poore Tyrant in her flight out of the body may be innocent. 0
 hel-hounds, 0 diabolical wretches, 0 infernall monsters! Did they onely suspect and imagine,
 that either in Kings there is any remainder of Kingly courage, or in their subiects any sparke
 left of ancient libertie; they durst as soone eat their nailes, or teare their owne flesh from
 the bones, as once broach the vessell of this diabolicall deuice. How long then, how long
 shall Kings whom the Lord hath called his Anointed, Kings the breathing Images of God vpon
 earth; Kings that with a wry or frowning looke, are able to crush these earth-wormes in
 pieces; how long shall they suffer this viperous brood, scotfree and without punishment, to
 spit in their faces ? how long, the Maiestie of GOD in their person and Royall Maiestie, to be
 so notoriously vilified, so dishonourably trampled vnder foot ? 
 The L. Cardinall boards vs with a like manifest ieast, and notably trifles; first,
 distinguishing betweene Tyrants by administration, and Tyrants by vsurpation; then shewing
 that he by no means doeth approue those prophane and heathenish Lawes, whereby secret
 practises and conspiracies against a Tyrant by administra- tion are permitted. His reason; Because after deposition there is a certaine habitude 
 
 to Royall dignitie, and as it were a kinde of politicke Character inherent
 in Kings, by which they are discerned from persons meerely private, or the common sort of
 people; and the obstacle, crosse-barre, or sparre once remooued and taken out of the way, the
 said Kings deposed are at length reinuested and endowed againe with lawfull vse of Royall
 dignitie, and with lawfull administration of the Kingdome . Is it possible that his
 Lordship can speake and vtter these words according to the inward per- swasion of his heart? I
 beleeue it not. For admit a King cast out of his King- dome were sure to escape with life; yet
 being once reduced to a priuate state of life, after hee hath wound or wrought himselfe out of
 deadly danger, so farre he is from holding or retayning any remainder of dignity or politike
 impression, that on the contrary he falleth into greater contempt and misery, then if he had
 bene a very peasant by birth, and had neuer held or gouerned the sterne of Royall estate. What
 fowle is more beautifull then the peacocke? Let her be plumed and bereft of her feathers; what
 owle, what iacke-daw more ridiculous, more without all pleasant fashion ? The homely sowter,
 the infamous catchpol, the base tincker, the rude artificer, the pack-horse porter, then
 liuing in Rome with libertie, when Valentinian was detain'd captiue by
 Saporas the Persian King, was more happie then that Romane Emperour.
 And in case the L. Cardinall himselfe should bee so happie (I should say so vnfortunate) to be
 stript of all his dignities and Ecclesiasticall promotions; would it not redound to his
 Lordships wonderfull consolation, that in his greatest extremity, in the lowest of his
 barenesse and nakednesse, he still retaineth a certaine habituall right and character of a
 Car- dinall, whereby to recouer the losse of his former dignities and honours ? when hee
 beholds these prints and impressions of his foresaid honours; would it not make him the more
 willing and glad, to forsake the backe of his venerable mule, to vse his Cardinals foot-cloath
 no longer, but euer after like a Cardinall in print and character, to walke on foot ? 
 But let vs examine his Lordships consolation of Kings, thrust out of their kingdomes by the
 Pope for heresie. The obstacle (as the L. Cardinall speaketh) being taken away ; that is to say, when the King shall be reformed; this habituall right and character yet inherent in the person of a King,
 restores him to the Lawfull administration of his Kingdome . I take this to be but a cold
 comfort: For here his Lordship doeth onely presuppose, and not prooue, that after a King is
 thrust out of his Throne, when hee shall repent and turne trew Romane Catholike, the other by
 whom he hath bene cast out, and by force disseised, will recall him to the Royall seat, and
 faithfully settle him againe in his ancient right, as one that reioyceth for the recouery of
 such a lost sheepe. But I should rather feare, the new King would presse and stand vpon other
 termes; as a terme of yeeres for a triall, whether the repentance of the King displaced be
 trew & sound to the coare, or counterfeit, dissembled, and painted holines; for the words,
 the sorrowfull and heauie lookes, the sad and formall gestures, of men pretending repentance,
 are not alwayes to bee taken, to be respected, to be credited. Againe, I should feare the afflicted King might be charged and borne downe too, that albeit hee hath
 renounced his former heresie, hee hath stumbled since at an other stone, and runne the ship of
 his faith against some other rocke of new hereticall prauitie. Or I should yet feare, he might
 be made to beleeue that heresie maketh a deeper im- pression, and a character more indeleble
 in the person, then is the other politike character of Regal Maiestie. Alas, good Kings! in
 how hard, in how miserable a state doe they stand ? Once deposed, and euer barred of
 repentance: As if the scapes and errors of Kings, were all sinnes against the Holy Ghost, or
 sinnes vnto death, for which it is not lawfull to pray. Falls a priuate person ? he may be set
 vp, and new established. Falls a King ? is a King deposed ? his repentance is euer fruitlesse,
 euer vnprofitable. Hath a priuate person a traine of seruants ? He can not be depriued of any
 one without his priuitie and consent. Hath a King millions of subiects ? He may be depriued by
 the Pope of a third part, when his Holinesse will haue them turne Clerics or enter Cloisters,
 without asking the King leaue: and so of subiects they may be made non-subiects. 
 But I question yet further. A King falling into heresie, is deposed by the Pope, his sonne
 stands pure Catholike: The Regal seat is empty. Who shall suc- ceed in the deposed Kings place
 ? Shall a stranger be preferred by the Pope ? That were to doe the innocent sonne egregious
 and notorious wrong. Shall the sonne himselfe ? That were a more iniurious part in the sonne
 against his father: For if the sonne bee touched with any feare of God, or mooued with any
 reuerence towards his father, hee will diligently and seriously take heed, that hee put not
 his father by the Kingdome by whose meanes he nimselfe is borne to a Kingdome. Nor will hee
 tread in the steps of Henry the V. Emperour, who by the Popes
 instigation, expelled and chased his aaged father out of the Imperiall dignitie. Much lesse
 wil he hearken to the voice and aduise of Doctor Suares 
 the Iesuite; who, in his booke written against my selfe, a
 booke applauded and approoued of many Doctours, after hee hath like a Doctour of the chaire,
 pronounced, That a King deposed by the Pope, cannot bee lawfully expelled or
 killed, but onely by such as the Pope hath charged with such execution : falleth to adde
 a little after: If the Pope shall declare a King to bee an heretike, and
 fallen from the Kingdome, without making further declaration touching execution ; that is
 to say, without giuing expresse charge vnto any to make away the King: then
 the lawfull successour being a Catholike, hath power to doe the feate; and if he shall
 refuse, or if there shall be none such, then it appertaineth to the comminaltie or body of
 the Kingdome . A most detestable sentence: For in hereditarie Kingdomes, who is the Kings
 lawfull suc- cessour, but his sonne ? The sonne then by this doctrine, shall imbrew his hands
 inhis owne fathers blood, so soone as he shall be deposed by the Pope. A matter so much the
 neerer and more deepely to bee apprehended, because the said most outragious booke flyeth like
 a furious mastiffe directly at my throat, and withall instilleth such precepts
 into the tender disposition of my sonne, as if hereafter hee shall become a Romane Catholike,
 so soone as the Pope shall giue me the lift out of my Throne, shall bind him forthwith to make
 effusion of his owne fathers blood. Such is the religion of these reuerend Fathers, the
 pillars of the Pontificiall Monarchie: In comparison of whose religion and holinesse, all the
 impietie that euer was among the Infidels, and all the barbarous crueltie that euer was among
 the Canibals, may passe hencefoorth in the Christian world for pure clemencie and humanitie.
 These things ought his Lordship to haue pondered, rather then to babble of habitudes and
 politike characters, which to the common people are like the Bergamasque or the wilde-Irish
 forme of speach, and passe their vnderstanding. 
 All these things are nothing in a maner, if we compare them with the last clause, which is
 the closer, and as it were the vpshot of his Lordships discourse: For therein he laboureth to
 perswade concerning this Article, framed to bridle the Popes tyrannicall power ouer Kings, if
 it should receiue gracious entertainement, and generall approbation; That it
 would breed great danger, and worke effects of pernicious consequence vnto Kings . The
 reason: because it would prooue an in- troduction to schisme; and schisme
 would stirre vp ciuil warres, contempt of Kings, distempered inclinations and motions to
 intrap their life; and which is worst of all, the fierce wrath of God, inflicting all sorts
 of calamities . An admirable paradoxe, and able to strike men stone-blind: that his
 Holinesse must haue power to de- pose Kings, for the better security and safegard of their
 life; that when their Crownes are made subiect vnto anothers will and pleasure, then they are
 come to the highest altitude and eleuation of honour; that for the onely-warrant of their
 life, their supreme and absolute greatnesse must be depressed; that for the longer keeping of
 their Crownes, another must plucke the Crowne from their heads. As if it should be said, Would
 they not be stript naked by another ? the best way is, for themselues to vntrusse, for
 themselues to put off all, and to goe naked of their owne accord. Wil they keepe their
 Souereigntie in safetie for euer ? The best way is to let another haue their Soueraigne
 authoritie and supreme Estate in his power. But I haue bene euer of this mind, that when my
 goods are at no mans command or disposing but mine own, then they are trewly and certainly
 mine owne. It may be this error is growen vpon me and other Princes for lacke of braines:
 whereupon it may be feared, or at least coniectured, the Pope meanes to shaue our crownes, and
 thrust vs into some cloister, there to hold ranke in the brotherhood of good King Childeric . Forasmuch then as my dull capacitie doeth not serue mee to
 reach or comprehend the pith of this admirable reason, I haue thought good to seeke and to vse
 the instruction of old and learned experience, which teacheth no such matter: by name, that
 ciuill warres and fearefull per- turbations of State in any nation of the world, haue at any
 time growen from this faithful credulity of subiects, that Popes in right haue no power to
 wrest and lift Kings out of their dignities and possessions. On the other side, by
 establishing the contrary maximes, to yoke and hamper the people with
 Pontificiall tyrannie, what rebellious troubles and stirres, what extreme desolations hath England bene forced to feare and feele, in the Reigne of my Predecessours
 Henrie II. Iohn and Henrie III ? These be the maximes and principles, which vnder the Emperour Henrie IV. and Frederic the I. made all Europe flowe with channels and streames of blood, like a riuer with water,
 while the Saracens by their incursions and victo- ries ouerflowed, and in a manner drowned the
 honour of the Christian name in the East. These be the maximes and principles, which made way
 for the warres of the last League into France ; by which the very bowels
 of that most famous and flourishing Kingdome were set on such a combustion, that France her selfe was brought within two fingers breadth of bondage to
 another Nation, and the death of her two last Kings most villenously and traiterously
 accomplished. The L. Cardinall then giuing these diabolicall maximes for meanes to secure the
 life and Estate of Kings, speaketh as if he would giue men counsell to dry themselues in the
 riuer, when they come as wet as a water spaniell out of a pond; or to warme themselues by the
 light of the Moone, when they are stark-naked, and well neere frozen to death.

THE CONCLVSION OF THE LORD OF PERRON EXAMINED. 
 AFTER the L. Cardinal hath stoutly shewed the strength of his arme, and the deepe skill of
 his head in fortification; at last he leaues his loftie scaffolds, and falls to worke neerer
 the ground, with more easie tooles of humble praiers and gentle exhortations. The summe of the
 whole is this: He adiures his auditors neuer to forge remedies, neuer so to
 prouide for the temporall safetie of Kings, as thereby to worke their finall falling from
 eternall saluation: neuer to make any rent or rupture in the vnitie of the Church, in this
 corrupt aage infected with pestilent Heresies, which already hauing made so great a breach in
 the walles of France, will no doubt double their strength by the
 dissentions, diuisions, and schismes of Catholikes. If this infectious plague shall still
 increase and grow to a carbuncle, it can by no meanes poyson Religion, without bringing Kings
 to their winding sheetes and wofull hearses. The first rowlers of that stone of offence,
 aimed at no other marke, then to make an ignominious and lamentable rent in the Church. Hee
 thinks the Deputies of the third Estate, had neither head nor first hand in contriuing this
 Article; but holds it rather a new deuice and subtile inuention, suggested by persons, which
 beeing already cut off by their owne practises from the body of the Romane Church, haue
 likewise inueigled and insnared some that beare the name of Catholiks, with some other
 Ecclesiastics; and vnder afaire pretence and goodly cloake, by name, the seruice of the King,
 haue surprised and played vpon their simplicitie. These men (as the Cardinall saith) doe imitate Iulian the Apostata, who to bring the
 Christians to idolatrous worship of false gods, commaunded the idols of Iupiter and Venus to be intermingled with Imperiall statues, and
 other Images of Christian Emperours, &c. 
 Then after certaine Rhetoricall flourishes, his Lordship fals to prosecute his
 former course, and cries out of this Article; A monster hauing the tayle of
 a fish, as if it came cutting the narrow Seas out of England: For in
 full efect it is downright the English oath; sauing that indeed the
 oath of England runneth in a more mild forme, and a more moderate
 straine . And here he suddenly takes occasion to make some digression: For out of the
 way, and clean from the matter, he entreth into some purpose of my praise
 and commendation : He courteously forsooth is pleased to grace mee with
 knowledge of learning, and with ciuill vertues : He seemeth chiefly to reioyce in his
 owne behalfe, and to giue me thanks, that I haue done him the honour to
 enter the lists of Theologicall dispute against hit Lordship . Howbeit he twitches and
 carpes at me withall, as at one that soweth seeds of dissension and schisme amongst Romane
 Catholiks: And yet he would seeme to qualifie the matter, and to make all whole againe, by
 saying, That in so doing I am perswaded I doe no more then my duetie
 requires. But now (as his Lordship followes the point) it standeth
 neither with godlinesse, nor with equity, nor with reason, that Acts made, that Statutes,
 Decrees, and Ordinances ratifiedfor the State and Gouernement of Eng- land, should be thrust for binding Laws vpon the Kingdome of France: nor that Catholikes, and much lesse that Ecclesiastics, to the ende they may
 liue in safetie, and freely enioy their priuiledges or immunities in France, should beforced to beleeue, and by oath to seale the same points, which 
 English Catholikes to the end they may pur- chase libertie onely to breath,
 nay sorrowfully to sigh rather, are constrained to allow and to aduow besides. And whereas
 in England there is no small number of Catho- likes, that lacke not
 constant and resolute minds to endure all sorts of punishment, rather then to take that oath
 of allegiance; will there not be found an other manner of number in France, armed with no lesse constancie and Christian resolution ? There will, most
 honourable Auditors, there will without all doubt: and we all that are of Episcopall dignity
 will sooner suffer Martyrdome in the cause . Then out of the super-abundance and
 ouer-weight of his Lordships goodnes, he closely coucheth and conuayeth a certaine distastfull
 opposition betweene mee and his King; with praises and thanks to God, that his King is not delighted, & takes no pleasure to make Martyrs. 
 
 All this Artificiall and swelling discourse like vnto puffe-past, if it be viewed at a neere
 distance, will be found like a bladder full of wind, without any soliditie of substantiall
 matter. For the Deputies of the third Estate were neuer so voide of understanding, to beleeue
 that by prouiding for the life and safety of their King, they should thrust him headlong into
 eternall damnation. Their braines were neuer so much blasted, so farre benummed, to dreame the
 soule of their King cannot mount vp to heauen, except he be dismounted from his Princely
 Throne vpon earth, whensoeuer the Pope shall hold vp his finger. 
 And whereas he is bold to pronounce, that heretikes of France doe
 make their benefit and aduantage of this diuision; that speech is grounded vpon this proposi-
 tion; That professors of the Christian Religion reformed (which is to say, purged and cleansed of all Popish dregs) are heretikes in fact, and ought so to bee reputed in
 right: Which proposition his Lordship will neuer soundly and sufficiently make good, before
 his Holinesse hath compiled an other Gospell, or hath forged an other Bible at his
 Pontificiall anuile. The L. Cardinall vndertooke to reade mee a lecture vpon that argument;
 but euer since hath played Mum-budget, and hath put himselfe to silence, like one at a
 Non-plus in his enterprise. There be three yeeres already gone and past, since his Lordship
 beganne to shape some answere to a certaine writing dispatched by mee in few daies: With
 forming and reform- ing, with filing and polishing, with labouring and licking his answere
 ouer and ouer againe, with reiterated extractions and calcinations, it may be coniectured that
 all his Lordships labour and cost is long since evaporated and vanished in the aire. Howbeit,
 as well the friendly conference of a King, (for I will not call it a contention) as also the
 dignitie, excellencie, and importance of the matter, long since deserued, and as long since
 required the publishing of some or other an- swere. His Lordships long silence will neuer be
 imputed to lacke of capacity, wherewith who knoweth not how abundantly he is furnished; but
 rather to well aduised agnition of his owne working and building vpon a weake foundation. 
 But let vs returne vnto these heretikes, that make so great gaine by the dis- agreement of
 Catholikes. It is no part of their dutie to aime at sowing of dissen- tions; but rather to
 intend and attend their faithfull performance of seruice to their King. If some be pleased,
 and others offended, when so good and loyall duties are sincerely discharged; it is for all
 good subiects to grieue and to be sory, that when they speake for the safetie of their King
 & honour of the trewth, it is their hard hap to leaue any at all vnsatisfied. But suppose
 the said heretiks were the Authors of this article preferred by the third Estate: What need
 they to conceale their names in that regard ? What need they to disclaime the credit of such a
 worthy act ? Would it not redound to their perpetuall honour, to be the onely subiects that
 kept watch ouer the Kings life and Crowne, that stood centinell, and walked the rounds for the
 preseruation of his Princely diademe, when all other had no more touch, no more feeling
 thereof then so many stones ? And what neede the Deputies for the third Estate, to receiue
 instructions from for- raine Kingdomes, concerning a cause of that nature; when there was no
 want of domesticall examples, and the French histories were plentifull in that argu- ment ?
 What neede they to gape for this reformed doctrine, to come swimming with a fishes tayle out
 of an Island to the mayne continent, when they had before their eyes the murders of two Kings,
 with diuerse ciuill warres, and many Arrests of Court, all tending to insinuate and suggest
 the introduction of the same remedy ? Suggestions are needlesse from abroad, when the
 mischiefe is felt at home. It seemes to me that his Lordship in smoothing and tickling the
 Deputies for the third Estate, doth no lesse then wring and wrong their great sufficiencie
 with contumely and outragious abuse; as if they were not furnished with suffi- cient
 foresight, and with loyall affection towards their King, for the preseruation of
 his life and honour, if the remedie were not beaten into their heads by those of the Religion,
 reputed heretikes. 
 Touching my selfe, ranged by his Lordship in the same ranke with sowers of dissention; I
 take my God to witnes, and my owne conscience, that I neuer dream'd of any such vnchristian
 proiect. It hath beene hitherto my ordinary course to follow honest counsells, and to walke in
 open waies. I neuer wonted my selfe to holes and corners, to crafty shifts, but euermore to
 plaine and open de- signes. I neede not hide mine intentions for feare of any mortall man,
 that puffeth breath of life out of his nostrils. Nor in any sort doe I purpose, to set Iulian the Apostata before mine eyes, as a patterne for me to follow. Iulian of a Christian became a Pagan: I professe the same faith of Christ
 still, which I haue euer professed: Iulian went about his designes with
 crafty conueiances; I neuer with any of his captious and cunning sleights: Iulian forced his
 subiects to in- fidelitie against Iesus Christ; I labour to induce my subiects vnto such
 tearmes of loyalty towards my selfe, as Iesus Christ hath prescribed and taught in his word.
 But how farre I differ from Iulian , it is to be seene more at large in
 my answere to Bellarmines Epistles written to Blackwell ; from whence the Lord Cardinall borrowing this example, it might well haue
 beseemed his Lordship to borrow likewise my answere from the same place. 
 Now as it mooues me nothing at all, to be drawne by his Lordship into suspi- tions of this
 nature and qualitie: so by the prayses, that he rockes me withall, I will neuer be lulled
 asleepe. To commend a man for his knowledge, and withall to take from him the feare of God, is
 to admire a souldier for his goodly head of haire or his curled locks, and withall to call him
 base coward, faint-hearted and fresh-water souldier. Knowledge, wit, and learning in an
 hereticke, are of none other vse and seruice, but only to make him the more culpable, &
 consequently obnoxious to the more grieuous punishments. All vertues turne to vices, when they
 become the seruants of impietie. The hand-maids which the Soueraigne Lady Wisedome calleth to
 be of her traine in the 9. Prouerb. are morall vertues, and humane sciences; which then become
 pernicious, when they run away from their Soueraigne Lady-Mistris, and put ouer themselues in
 seruice to the deuill. What difference is betweene two men, both alike wanting the knowledge
 of God; the one furnished with arts and ciuill vertues, the other brutishly barbarous and of a
 deformed life, or of prophane maners ? What is the difference betweene these two ? I make this
 the onely difference: the first goeth to hell with a better grace, and falleth into perdition
 with more facilitie, then the second: But hee becom- meth exceedingly wicked, euen threefold
 and fourefold abominable, if he wast his treasure and stocke of ciuill vertues in persecuting
 the Church of CHRIST: and if that may be layd in his dish which was cast in Caesars teeth, that in plaine sobernes and well-setled temper, he attempts the ruine of
 the Common-wealth, which from a drunken sot might receiue perhaps a more easie fall. In
 briefe, I scorne all garlands of praises, which are not euer greene; but being dry and
 withered for want of sap and radicall moysture, doe flagge about barbarous
 Princes browes. I defie and renounce those praises, which fit mee no more then they fit a Ma- humetane King of Marocco . I contest against all
 praises which grace me with petie accessories, but rob me of the principall, that one thing
 necessary; namely, the feare and knowledge of my GOD: vnto whose Maiestie alone, I haue
 deuoted my Scepter, my sword, my penne, my whole industrie, my whole selfe, with all that is
 mine in whole and in part. I doe it, I doe it in all humble acknowledge- ment of his
 vnspeakable mercie and fauour, who hath vouchsafed to deliuer me from the erroneous way of
 this aage, to deliuer my Kingdome from the Popes tyrannicall yoke, vnder which it hath lyen in
 times past most grieuously op- pressed: My Kingdom where God is now purely serued, and called
 vpon in a tongue which all the vulgar understand: My Kingdome, where the people may now reade
 the Scriptures without any special priuiledge from the Apostolike See, and with no lesse
 libertie then the people of Ephesus, of Rome, and of Corinth did reade the holy Epistles,
 written to their Churches by S. Paul : My Kingdome, where the people now
 pay no longer any tribute by the poll for Papall indulgences, as they did about an hundred
 yeeres past, and are no longer compelled to the mart, for pardons beyond the Seas and
 mountaines, but haue them now freely offered from God, by the doctrine of the Gospel preached
 at home within their owne seuerall parishes and iurisdictions. If the Churches of my Kingdome, in the L. Cardinals accompt, bee
 miserable for these causes and the like; let him dreame on, and talke his pleasure: for my
 part I will euer auow, that more worth is our misery then all his felicitie. For the rest, it
 shal by Gods grace be my daily endeauour and serious care, to passe my daies in shaping to my
 selfe such a course of life, that without shamefull calumniating of my person, it shall not
 rest in the tip of any tongue, to touch my life with iust reprehension or blame. Nor am I so
 priuie to mine owne guiltinesse, as to thinke my state so desperate, so deplorable, as Popes
 haue made their owne: For some of them haue bene so open-hearted and so tongue-free, to
 pronounce that Popes themselues, the key- bearers of Heauen and hell, cannot be saued. Two
 Popes, reckoned among the best of the whole bunch or packe, namely, Adrian the IV. and Marcelline 
 the II. haue both sung one and the same note; that in their vnderstanding they could
 not conceiue any reason why, or any meanes how those that sway the Popedome can be partakers
 of saluation; But for my particular, grounding my faith vpon the promises of God contained in
 the Gospel, I doe confidently and assuredly beleeue, that repenting me of my sinnes, and
 reposing my whole trust in the merits of IESVS CHRIST, I shall obtaine forgiuenesse of my
 sinnes through his Name. Nor doe I feare, that I am now, or shall be hereafter cast out of the
 Churches lap and bosome; that I now haue or hereafter shall haue no right to the Church as a
 putrified member thereof, so long as I do or shall cleaue to CHRIST IESVS, the
 Head of the Church: the appellation and name whereof, serueth in this corrupt aage, as a
 cloake to couer a thousand new inuentions; and now no longer sig- nifies the assembly of the
 faithfull or such as beleeue in IESVS CHRIST according to his word, but a certaine glorious
 ostentation and temporall Monarchie, whereof the Pope forsooth is the supreame head. 
 But if the L. Cardinall by assured and certaine knowledge (as perhaps he may by common fame)
 did vnderstand the horrible conspiracies that haue bin plotted and contriued, not against my
 person and life alone, but also against my whole stocke: if he rightly knew & were inly
 perswaded, of how many fowle periuries & wicked treasons, diuers Ecclesiastical persons
 haue bene lawfully conuicted: in stead of charging me with false imputations, that I suffer not my Catholiks to fetch a sigh, or to draw their breath; and that I
 thrust my Catholikes vpon the sharpe edge of punishment in euery kinde ; he would, and
 might well, rather wonder, how I my selfe, after so many dangers run, after so many
 proditorious snares escaped, do yet fetch my owne breath, and yet practise Princely clemencie
 towards the said Catholiks, notorious transgressors of diuine & humane lawes. If the
 French king in the heart of his kingdom, should nourish and foster such a nest of stinging
 hornets and busie wasps, I meane such a pack of subiects, denying his absolute Soueraignty, as
 many Romane Catholiks of my Kingdome do mine: It may wel be doubted, whether the L. Cardinal
 would aduise his king stil to feather the nest of the said Catholiks, stil to keep them warme,
 stil to beare them with an easie and gentle hand: It may wel be doubted, whether his Lordship
 would extol their constancie, that would haue the courage to sheath vp their swords in his
 Kings bowels, or blow vp his King with gun-powder, into the neather station of the lowest
 region: It may wel be doubted, whether he would indure that Orator, who (like as himselfe hath
 done) should stir vp others to suffer Martyrdome after such examples, and to imitate
 parricides & traitors in their constancy. The scope then of the L. Cardinall, in striking
 the sweet strings, and sounding the pleasant notes of praises, which faine he would fil mine
 eares withal; is only by his excellent skil in the musick of Oratory, to bewitch the harts of
 my subiects, to infatuate their minds, to settle them in a resolution to depriue me of my
 life. The reason: Because the plotters and practisers against my life, are honoured and
 rewarded with a glorious name of Martyrs: their constancie (what els?) is admired, when they
 suffer death for treason. Wheras hitherto during the time of my whole raigne to this day, (I
 speake it in the word of a King, and trewth it selfe shall make good the Kings word) no man
 hath lost his life, no man hath in- dured the Racke, no man hath suffered corporall punishment
 in other kinds, meerely or simply, or in any degree of respect, for his conscience in matter
 of religion; but for wicked conspiring against my life, or Estate, or Royall dignitie; or els
 for some notorious crime, or some obstinate and wilfull disobedience: Of which traiterous and
 viperous brood, I commanded one to be hanged by the necke of late in Scotland ; a Iesuite of intolerable impudencie, who at his arraign- ment
 and publike triall, stiffely maintained, that I haue robbed the Pope of his right, and haue no
 manner of right in the possession of my Kingdome. His Lordship therefore in offering himselfe
 to Martyrdome, after the rare example of Catholiks, as he saith, suffering all sort of
 punishment in my Kingdome, doeth plainely professe himselfe a follower of traytors and
 parricides. These be the Worthies, these the heroicall spirits, these the honourable Captaines
 and Coronels, whose vertuous parts neuer sufficiently magnified and praysed, his Lordshippe
 propoundeth for imitation to the French Bishops. O the name of Martyrs,
 in olde times a sacred name! how is it now derided and scoffed ? how is it in these daies
 filthily prophaned ? O you the whole quire and holy company of Apostles, who haue sealed the
 trewth with your dearest blood! how much are you dis- paraged ? how vnfitly are you paragoned
 and matched, when traytors, bloody butchers, and King-killers are made your assistants, and of
 the same Quorum; or to speake in milder tearmes, when you are coupled
 with Martyrs that suffer for maintaining the Temporall rites of the Popes Empire ? with
 Bishops that offer themselues to a Problematicall Martyrdome, for a point decided neither by
 the authorities of your Spirit-inspired pens, not by the auncient and venerable testimonie of
 the Primitiue Church ? for a point which they dare not vndertake to teach, otherwise then by a
 doubtfull, cold, fearefull way of discourse, and alto- gether without resolution. In good
 sooth, I take the Cardinall for a personage of a quicker spirit and clearer sight, (let his
 Lordship hold mee excused) then to perswade my selfe, that in these matters his tongue and his
 heart, his pen and his inward iudgement, haue any concord or correspondence one with another:
 For beeing very much against his minde (as hee doeth confesse) thrust into the office of an
 Aduocate to pleade this cause; he suffered himselfe to bee carried (after his engagement) with
 some heat, to vtter some things against his conscience, mur- muring and grumbling the contrary
 within; and to affirme some other things with confidence, whereof hee had not beene otherwise
 informed, then onely by vaine and lying report. Of which ranke is that bold assertion of his
 Lordship; That many Catholiks in England, rather then they would subscribe to the oath of
 allegiance in the forme thereof, haue vndergone all sorts of punishment: For in England (as we haue trewly giuen the whole Christian world to vnderstand
 in our Preface to the Apologie) there is but one forme or kind of punishment ordained for all
 sorts of traytors. 
 Hath not his Lordship now graced me with goodly testimonialls of prayse and commendation ?
 Am I not by his prayses proclaimed a Tyrant, as it were ine- briated with blood of the Saints,
 and a famous Enginer of torments for my Catho- likes ? To this exhortation for the suffering
 of Martyrdome, in imitation of my English traytors and parricides, if wee shall adde; how
 craftily and subtilly hee makes the Kings of England to holde of the
 Pope by fealty, and their kingdome in bondage to the Pope by Temporall recognizance, it shall
 easily appeare, that his holy-water of prayses wherewith I am so reuerently
 besprinkled, is a composition extracted out of a dram of hony and a pound of gall, first
 steeped in a strong decoc- tion of bitter wormewood, or of the wild gourd called Coloquintida:
 For after he hath in the beginning of his Oration, spoken of Kings that owe fealtie to the Pope and are not Soueraignes in the
 highest degree of Temporall supremacie within their Kingdomes; to explaine his mind and
 meaning the better, he marshals the Kings of England a little after in
 the same ranke. His words be these; When King Iohn of England, not yet bound in any temporall recognizance to the Pope,
 had expelled his Bishops, &c . His Lordship means, that King Iohn became so bound to the Pope not long after. And what may this meaning be, but in
 plaine tearmes and broad speach, to call me vsurper and vnlawfull King ? For the feudatarie,
 or he that holdeth a Mannor by fealty, when he doeth not his homage, with all suit and seruice
 that he owes to the Lord Paramount , doeth fall from the propertie of
 his fee. This reproach of the L. Cardinals, is seconded with an other of Bellar- mines his brother Cardinall; That Ireland was giuen to
 the Kings of England by the Pope. The best is that his most reuerend
 Lordship hath not shewed, who it was that gaue Ireland to the Pope. 
 And touching Iohn King of England , thus in
 briefe stands the whole matter. Betweene Henry 2. and the Pope had
 passed sundry bickerments, about collating of Ecclesiasticall dignities. Iohn the sonne, after his fathers death, reneweth, vndertaketh, and pursueth the same
 quarrell: Driueth certaine English Bishops out of the Kingdome, for
 defending the Popes insolent vsurpation vpon his Royall prerogatiue, and Regall rights;
 Sheweth such Princely courage and resolu- tion in those times, when all that stood and
 suffered for the Popes Temporall pretensions against Kings, were enrowled Martyrs or
 Confessors. The Pope takes the matter in fowle scorne, and great indignation; shuts the King
 by his excommunicatory Bulls out of the Church; stirres vp his Barons, for other causes the
 Kings heauy friends, to rise in armes; giues the Kingdome of England 
 (like a masterlesse man turned ouer to a new master) to Philippus
 Augustus King of France ; bindes Philip to
 make a conquest of England by the sword, or else no bargaine, or else
 no gift; promises Philip , in recompence of his trauell and Royall
 expences in that conquest, full absolution and a generall pardon at large for all his sinnes:
 to bee short, cuts King Iohn out so much worke, and makes him keep so
 many yrons in the fire for his worke, that he had none other way, none other meanes to pacifie
 the Popes high displeasure, to correct or qualifie the malignitie of the Popes cholericke
 humour, by whom he was then so entangled in the Popes toyles, but by yeelding himselfe to
 become the Popes vassal, and his Kingdome feudatary, or to hold by fealty of the Papall See.
 By this meanes his Crowne is made tributary, all his people liable to payment of taxes by the
 poll for a certaine yeerely tribute, and he is blessed with a pardon for all his sinnes.
 Whether King Iohn was mooued to doe this dishonourable act vpon any
 deuotion, or inflamed with any zeale of Religion; or inforced by the
 vnresistable weapons of necessitie, who can be so blind, that he doeth not well see and
 clearely perceiue ? For to purchase his owne freedome from this bondage to the Pope; what
 could he bee vnwilling to doe, that was willing to bring his Kingdome vnder the yoake of Amirales Murmelinus a Mahumetan Prince, then King of Granado and Barbaria ? The Pope after that, sent a Legat into
 England : The King now the Popes vassall, and holding his Crowne of the
 Pope, like a man that holds his land of another by Knights seruice, or by homage and fealtie,
 doeth faire homage for his Crowne to the Popes Legat, and layeth downe at his feet a great
 masse of the purest gold in coyne. The reuerend Legat, in token of his Masters Soueraigntie,
 with more then vsuall pride falls to kicking and spurning the treasure, no doubt with a paire
 of most holy feet: Not onely so; but likewise at solemne feasts is easily entreated to take
 the Kings chaire of Estate. Heere I would faine know the Lord Cardinals opinion; whether these
 actions of the Pope were iust or vniust, lawfull or vnlaw- full, according to right or against
 all right and reason. If he will say against right; it is then cleare, that against right his
 Lordship hath made way to this example: if according to right, let him then make it knowen,
 from whence or from whom this power was deriued and conueyed to the Pope, whereby hee makes
 himselfe Souereigne Lord of Temporalties in that Kingdome, where neither he nor any of his
 prececessours euer pretended any right, or layd any claime to Temporall matters before. Are
 such prankes to be played by the Pontificiall Bishop ? Is this an act of Holinesse, to set a
 Kingdome on fire by the flaming brands of sedi- tion ? to dismember and quarter a Kingdome
 with intestine warres; onely to this end, that a King once reduced to the lowest degree of
 miserie, might be lifted by his Holinesse out of his Royall prerogatiue, the very soule and
 life of his Royall Estate ? When began this Papall power ? In what aage began the Pope to
 practise this power? What! haue the ancient Canons, (for the Scripture in this question
 beareth no pawme) haue the Canons of the ancient Church imposed any such satisfaction vpon a
 sinner, that of a Souereigne and free King, he should become vassall to his ghostly Father;
 that he should make himselfe together with all his people and subiects tributaries to a
 Bishop, that shall rifle a whole Nation of their coine, that shall receiue homage of a King,
 and make a King his vassall ? What! Shall not a sinner be quitted of his faults, except his
 Pastor turne robber, and one that goeth about to get a booty ? except hee make his Pastour a
 Feoffee in his whole Estate, and suffer himselfe vnder a shadow of penance to freeze naked, to
 be turned out of all his goods and possessions of inheritance ? But be it granted, admit his
 Holinesse robs one Prince of his rights and reuenewes, to con- ferre the same vpon another:
 were it not an high degree of tyrannie to finger another mans estate, and to giue that away to
 a third, which the second hath no right, no lawfull authoritie to giue ? Well, if the Pope
 then shall become his owne caruer in the rights of another; if he shall make his owne coffers
 to swell with anothers reuenewes, if he shall decke and aray his owne backe in the spoiles of
 a sinner, with whom in absolution he maketh peace, and taketh truce; what can
 this be else, but running into further degrees of wickednesse and mischiefe ? what can this be
 else, but heaping of robbery vpon fraud, and impietie vpon rob- bery ? For by such deceitfull,
 craftie, and cunning practises, the nature of the Pontificiall See, meerely spirituall, is
 changed into the Kings-bench-Court, meerely temporall: the Bishops chaire is changed into a
 Monarchs Throne. And not onely so; but besides, the sinners repentance is changed into a snare
 or pit- fall of cousening deceit; and S. Peters net is changed into a
 casting-net or a flew, to fish for all the wealth of most flourishing Kingdomes. Moreouer, the
 King (a hard case) is driuen by such wiles and subtilities, to worke impossibilities, to acte
 more then is lawfull or within the compasse of his power to practise: For the King neither may
 in right, nor can by power trans-nature his Crowne, impaire the Maiestie of his Kingdome, or
 leaue his Royal dignitie lesse free to his heire apparant, or next successor, then he receiued
 the same of his predecessour: Much lesse, by any dishonourable capitulations, by any vnworthy
 contracts, degrade his posteritie, bring his people vnder the grieuous burden of tributes and
 taxes to a forreine Prince: Least of all, make them tributary to a Priest; vnto whom it on way
 apperteineth to haue any hand in the ciuill affaires of Kings, or to distaine, and vnhallow
 their Crownes. And therefore when the Pope dispatched his Nuntio to Philippus Augustus , requesting the King to auert Lewis his sonne from laying any claime to the Kingdome of England;
 Philip answered the Legat (as we haue it in Matth. Paris;) No King, no
 Prince can alienate or giue away his Kingdom, but by consent of his Barons, bound by Knights
 seruice to defend the said Kingdome: and in case the Pope shall stand for the contrary error,
 his Holiness shall giue to Kingdomes a most pernicious example . By the same Author it is
 testified, that King Iohn became odious to his subiects, for such
 dishonourable and vn- worthy inthralling of his Crowne, and Kingdome. Therefore the Popes
 right pretended to the Crowne of England , which is nothing else but a
 ridiculous vsurpa- tion, hath long agoe vanished into smoake, and required not so much as the
 draw- ing of one sword to snatch and pull it by violence out of his hands: For the Popes power
 lying altogether in a certaine wilde and wandring conceit or opinion of men, and being onely
 an imaginary castle in the ayre, built by pride, and vnderpropped by superstition, is very
 speedily dispersed vpon the first rising and appearing of the trewth in her glorious
 brightnesse. There is none so very a dolt or block- head to deny, that in case this right of
 the Pope ouer England , is grounded vpon Gods word, then his Holinesse
 may challenge the like right ouer all other King- domes: because all other Kingdomes, Crownes,
 and Scepters are subiect alike to Gods word: For what priuiledge, what charter, what euidence
 can France fetch out of the Rolles, or any other treasurie of her
 monuments or records, to shew that she oweth lesse subiection to God then England ? Or was this yoke of bondage then brought vpon the English Nation; was it a
 prerogatiue, whereby they might more easily come to the libertie of the sonnes of God ? Of
 were the people of 
 England perswaded, that for all their substance, wealth, and life
 bestowed on the Pope, his Holinesse by way of exchange returned them better weight and measure
 of spirituall graces ? It is ridiculous, onely to conceiue these toyes in thought; and yet
 with such ridiculous, with such toyes in conceit, his Lordship feeds and entertaines his
 auditors. 
 From this point hee falleth to another bowt and fling at his heretikes, with whom he played
 no faire play before: 
 There is not one Synode of ministers (as he saith) which would willingly subscribe to this Article, whereunto wee should bee bound to
 sweare . But herein his Lordship shooteth farre from the marke. This Article is approoued
 and preached by the Ministers of my Kingdome: It is like- wise preached by those of France , and if need bee (I asssure my selfe) will bee signed by all the
 Ministers of the French Church. 
 The L. Cardinall proceedeth, (for hee meaneth not so soone to giue ouer these heretikes:)
 All their Consistories beleeue it as their Creed; that if Catholike Princes
 at any time shall offer force vnto their conscience, then they are dispensed withall for
 their oath of alleagiance. Hence are these modifications and restrictions, tossed so much in
 their mouthes; Prouided the King force vs not in our conscience. Hence are these exceptions
 in the profession of their faith; Prouided the Soueraigne power and authoritie of God, bee
 not in any sort violated or infringed . In am not able to con- ceiue what engine can bee
 framed of these materialls, for the bearing of Kings out of their eminent seates, by any
 lawfull authoritie or power in the Pope: For say, those of the Religion should be tainted with
 some like errour; how can that be any shelter of excuse for those of the Romish Church, to
 vndermine or to digge vp the Thrones of their Kings ? But in this allegation of the L.
 Cardinall, there is nothing at all, which doeth not iumpe iust and accord to a haire with the
 Article of the third Estate, and with obedience due to the King: For they doe not professe,
 that in case the King shall commaund them to doe any act contrarie to their con- science, they
 would flie at his throat, would make any attempt against his life, would refuse to pay their
 taxations, or to defend him in the warres: They make no profession of deposing the King, or
 discharging the people from the oath of allegiance tendred to the King: which is the very
 point or issue of the matter in controuersie, and the maine mischiefe, against which the third
 Estate hath bin most worthily carefull to prouide a wholesome remedie by this Article. There
 is a world of difference betweene the termes of disobedience, and of deposition. It is one
 thing to disobey the Kings commaund in matters prohibited by diuine lawes, and yet in all
 other matters to performe full subiection vnto the King. It is another thing of a farre higher
 degree or straine of disloyaltie, to bare the King of his Royall robes, throne, and scepter,
 and when he is thus farre disgraced, to degrade him and to put him from his degree and place
 of a King. If the holy Father should charge the L. Cardinal to doe some act repugnant in his
 owne knowledge to the Law of God, I will religiously, and according to the rule of charitie
 pre- sume, that his Lordship in this case would stand out against his Holinesse,
 and notwithstanding would still acknowledge him to be Pope. 
 His Lordship yet prosecutes and followes his former purpose: Hence are
 those armes which they haue oftentimes borne against Kings, when Kings practised to take away
 the libertie of their conscience and Religion. Hence are those turbulent Com- motions and
 seditions by them raised, as well in the Low-countryes against the King of Spaine, as in
 Swethland against the Catholike King of Polonia . Besides, he casteth Iunius Brutus, Buchananus, Barclaius , and Gerson in our teeth.
 To what end all this ? I see not how it can bee auaileable to authorize the deposing of Kings,
 especially the Popes power to depose. And yet his Lordship here doth outface (by his leaue)
 and beare downe the trewth: For I could neuer yet learne by any good and trew intelligence,
 that in France those of the Religion tooke armes at any time against their King: In the first
 ciuill warres they stood onely vpon their guard: they stood onely to their lawfull wards and
 locks of defence: they armed not, nor tooke the field before they were pursued with fire and
 sword, burnt vp and slaughtred. Besides, Religion was neither the root nor the rynde of those
 intestine troubles. The trew ground of the quarrell was this: During the minority of King Francis II. the Protestants of France were a refuge and succour to the
 Princes of the blood, when they were kept from the Kings presence, and by the ouer powring
 power of their enemies, were no better then plaine driuen and chased from the Court. I meane,
 the Grand-father of the King now raigning, and the Grand-father of the Prince of Conde , when they had no place of safe retreate. In regard of which worthy
 and honourable seruice, it may seeme the French King hath reason to haue the Protestants in
 his gracious remembrance. With other commotion or insurrection, the Protestants are not iustly
 to be charged. But on the contrary, certaine it is that King Henry III.
 raysed and sent forth seuerall armies against the Protestants, to ruine and roote them out of
 the Kingdome: howbeit, so soone as they perceiued the said King was brought into dangerous
 tearms, they ranne with great speed and speciall fidelitie to the Kings rescue and succour, in
 the present danger. Certaine it is, that by their good seruice the said King was deliuered,
 from a most extreame and imminent perill of his life in the city of Tours. Certaine it is,
 they neuer abandoned that Henry 3. nor his next successor Henry 4. in all the heat of reuolts and rebellions, raised in the greatest
 part of the Kingdome by the Pope, and the more part of the Clergie; but stood to the said
 Kings in all their battels, to beare vp the Crowne then tottering and ready to fall. Certaine
 it is, that euen the heads and principalls of those by whom the late King deceased was pursued
 with all extremities, at this day doe enioy the fruit of all the good seruices done to the
 King by the said Protestants: And they are now disgraced, kept vnder, exposed to publike
 hatred. What, for kindling coales of questions and controuersies about Religion ? Forsooth,
 not so; but because if they might haue equall and indifferent dealing, if credit might be
 giuen to their faithfull aduertisements, the Crowne of their Kings should bee no longer pinned to the Popes flie-flap; in France there should bee no French exempted from
 subiection to the French King; causes of benefices or of matrimonie, should bee no longer
 citable and summonable to the Romish Court; and the Kingdome should bee no longer tributarie
 vnder the colour of annats, the first fruits of Benefices after the remooue or death of the
 Incumbent, and other like impositions. 
 But why doe I speake so much in the behalfe of the French Protestants ? The Lord Cardinall
 himselfe quittes them of this blame, when he telleth vs this doc- trine for the deposing of
 Kings by the Popes mace or verge, had credit and authoritie through all France, vntill Caluins time. Doth not his Lordship vnder- hand confesse by these words,
 that Kings had beene alwaies before Caluins time, the more dishonoured,
 and the worse serued ? Item, that Protestants, whom his Lordship calls heretikes, by the light
 of holy Scripture made the world then and euer since to see the right of Kings, oppressed so
 long before ? As for those of the Low Countries, and the subiects of Swethland, I haue little
 to say of their case, because it is not within ordinary compasse, and indeed serueth nothing
 to the pur- pose. These Nations, besides the cause of Religion, doe stand vpon certaine
 reasons of State, which I will not here take vpon me like a Iudge to determine or to sift. Iunius Brutus , Whom the Lord Cardinall obiecteth, is an author vnknowne;
 and perhaps of purpose patcht vp by some Romanist, with a wyly deceit to draw the reformed
 Religion into hatred with Christian Princes. Buchanan I reckon and
 ranke among Poets, not among Diuines, classicall or common. If the man hath burst out here and
 there into some tearmes of excesse, or speach of bad temper; that must be imputed to the
 violence of his humour, and, heate of his spirit, not in any wise to the rules and conclusions
 of trew Religion, rightly by him conceiued before. Barclaius alledged
 by the Cardinall, meddles not with deposing of Kings; but deals with disavowing them for
 Kings, when they shal renounce the right of Royalty, and of their owne accord giue ouer the
 Kingdome. Now he that leaues it in the Kings choice, either to hold or to giue ouer his
 Crowne, leaues it not in the Popes power to take away the Kingdome. 
 Of Gerson obtruded by the Cardinal, we haue spoken sufficiently
 before, Where it hath beene shewed how Gerson is disguised, masked, and
 peruerted by his Lordship. In briefe, I take not vpon me to iustifie and make good all the
 say- ings of particular authors: We glory (and well we may) that our religion affordeth no
 rules of rebellion; nor any dispensation to subiects for the oath of their alle- giance; and
 that none of our Churches giue entertainement vnto such monstrous and abhominable principles
 of disloyaltie. 
 If any of the French, otherwise
 perswaded in former times, now hauing altered and changed his iudgement, doth contend for the
 Soueraignty of Kings against Papall vsurpation: He doubtles, for winding himselfe out of the
 Laborinth of an error so intricate & pernicious, deserueth great honour and
 speciall praise: He is worthy to hold a place of dignity aboue the L. Cardinall; who hath
 quitted and betrayed his former iudgement, which was holy and iust: Their motions are
 contrary, their markes are opposite: The one reclineth from euill to good, the other declineth
 from good to euill. 
 At last his Lordship commeth to the close of his Oration, and bindes vp his whole harangue
 with a feate wreath of praises, proper to his King. He styles the King the eldest Sonne of the
 Church, a young shoot of the lilly, which King Salomon in all his Royaltie was not able to
 match. He leades vs by the hand into the plea- sant meadowes of Histories, there to learne
 vpon the very first sight and view, That so long, so oft as the Kings of France embraced
 vnion, and kept good tearmes of concord with Popes and the Apostolike See; so long as the
 spouse of the Church was pastured and fed among the lillies, all sorts of spirituall and
 temporall graces abundantly showred vpon their Crownes, and vpon their people: On the con-
 trary, when they made any rent or separation from the most holy See; then the lillies were
 pricked and almost choaked with sharpe thornes; they beganne to droope, to stoope, and to
 beare their beautifull heads downe to the very ground, vnder the strong flawes and gusts of
 boystrous windes and tempests. 
 My answere to this flourishing close and vpshot, shall be no lesse apert then apt. It
 sauours not of good and faithfull seruice, to smooth and stroake the Kings head with a soft
 hand of oyled speech, and in the meane time to take away the Crowne from his head, and to
 defile it with dirt. But let us try the cause by euidence of Historie, yea by the voice and
 verdict of experience; to see whether the glorious beauty of the French lillies hath beene at
 any time blasted, and thereupon hath faded, by starting aside, and making separation from the
 holy See. Vnder the raigne of King Philip the Faire, France was blessed
 with peace and prosperity, notwithstanding some outragious acts done against the Papall See,
 and contumelious crying quittance by King Philip with the Pope. Lewis 12. in ranged battell defeated the armies of Pope ulius 2. and his Confederates: proclaimed the said Pope to be fallen from the Popedome:
 stamped certaine coynes and pieces of gold with a dishonourable mot, euen to Rome it selfe,
 Rome is Babylon : yet so much was Lewis loued
 and honoured of his people, that by a peculiar title he was called, the
 Father of the Country . Greater blessings of God, greater outward peace and plenty,
 greater inward peace with spirituall and celestiall treasures, were neuer heaped vpon my Great
 Brittaine, then haue beene since my Great Britaine became Great in the greatest and chiefest
 respect of all; to wit, since my Great Brittaine hath shaken off the Popes yoke; since she
 hath refused to receiue and to entertaine the Popes Legats, employed to collect S. Peters tribute or Peter-pence ; since the Kings of
 England, my Great Brittaine, haue not beene the Popes vassals to doe him homage for their
 Crowne, and haue no more felt the lashings, the scourgings of base and beggarly Monkes. Of
 Holland, Ze- land, and Friseland, what neede I speake ? yet a word and no more. Were they not a kinde of naked and bare people, of small value, before God lighted the torch
 of the Gospel, and aduanced it in those Nations ? were they not an ill fedde and scragged
 people, in comparison of the inestimable wealth and prosperity (both in all military actions
 and mechanicall trades, in trafficke as merchants, in marting as men of warre, in long
 nauigation for discouerie) to which they are now raysed and mounted by the mercifull blessing
 of God, since the darknes of Poperie hath beene scattered, and the bright Sunne of the Gospel
 hath shined in those Coun- tryes ? Behold the Venetian Republique: Hath shee now lesse
 beautie, lesse glory, lesse peace and prosperitie, since she lately fell to bicker and contend
 with the Pope ? since she hath wrung out of the Popes hand, the one of his two swords ? since
 she hath plumed and shaked his Temporall dominion ? On the contrarie; after the French Kings
 had honoured the Popes, with munificent graunts and gifts of all the cities and territories,
 lands and possessions, which they now hold in Italy, and the auncient Earledome of Auignon in France for an ouer- plus; were they not rudely recompenced, and
 homely handled by their most ingratefull fee-farmers and copy-holders ? Haue not Popes forged
 a donation of Constantine , of purpose to blot out all memory of Pepins and Charlemaignes dona- tion ? Haue they not
 vexed and troubled the State ? haue they not whetted the sonnes of Lewis the Courteous against their owne Father, whose life was a pat- terne and example
 of innocencie ? Haue they not by their infinite exactions, robbed and scoured the Kingdome of
 all their treasure ? Were not the Kings of France, driuen to stoppe their violent courses by
 the pragmaticall sanction ? Did they not sundry times interdict the Kingdome, degrade the
 Kings, solicite the neighbour-Princes to inuade and lay hold on the Kingdome, and stirre vp
 the people against the King, whereby a gate was opened to a world of troubles and parricides ?
 Did not Rauaillac render this reason for his monstrous and horrible
 attempt, That King Henry had a designe to warre with God, because he
 had a designe to take armes against his Holinesse, who is God ? This makes me to wonder, what
 mooued the L. Cardinall to marshall the last ciuill warres and motions in France , in the ranke of examples of vnhappy separation from the Pope, when the Pope
 himselfe was the trumpetor of the same troublesome motions. If the Pope had bene wronged and
 offended by the French King, or his people, and the Kingdome of France 
 had been scourged with pestilence, or famine, or some other calamitie by forraine enemies; it
 might haue beene taken in probabililtie, as a vengeance of God for some iniurie done vnto his
 Vicar: But his Holiness being the roote, the ground, the master-workeman and artificer of all
 these mis- chiefes; how can it be said, that God punisheth any iniurie done to the Pope? but
 rather that his Holinesse doth reuenge his owne quarrell; and which is worst of all, when his
 Holinesse hath no iust cause of quarrell or offence. Now then; to exhort a Nation (as the L.
 Cardinall hath done) by the remembrance of former calamities, to curry fauour with the Pope,
 and to hold a strict vnison with his Holi- nesse, is no exhortation to beare the Pope any
 respect of loue, or of reuerence, but rather a rubbing of memory, and a calling
 to minde of those grieuous calamities, whereof the Pope hath been the only occasion. It is
 also a threatning and obtrud- ing of the Popes terrible thunder-bolts, which neuer scorched
 nor parched any skinne, (except crauens and meticulous bodies) and haue brought many great
 showres of blessings vpon my Kingdome. 
 As for France , if she hath enioyed prosperity in the times of her
 good agree- ment with Popes, it is because the Pope seekes the amity of Princes that are in
 prosperitie, haue the meanes to curbe his pretensions, and to put him to some plunge. Kings
 are not in prosperity, because the Pope holds amitie with Kings; but his Holinesse vseth all
 deuises, & seeketh all meanes to haue amitie with Kings, because he sees them flourish
 & sayle with prosperous winds. The swallow is no cause, but a companion of the spring: the
 Pope is no worker of a Kingdoms felicity, but a wooer of kings when they sit in felicities
 lap: he is no founder, but a follower of their good fortunes. On the other side: let a
 Kingdome fall into some grieuous disaster or calamitie, let ciuill warres boile in the bowels
 of the King- dome; ciuill wars no lesse dangerous to the State, then fearefull and grieuous to
 the people; who riseth sooner then the Pope, who rusheth sooner into the troubled streames
 then the Pope, who thrusteth himselfe sooner into the heate of the quarrell then the Pope, who
 runneth sooner to raise his gaine by the publike wrack then the Pope, and all vnder colour of
 a heart wounded and bleeding for the saluation of soules ? If the lawfull King happen to be
 foyled, to be oppressed, and thereupon the State by his fall to get a new master by the Popes
 practise; then the said new master must hold the Kingdome as of the Popes free gift, and rule
 or guide the sterne of the State at his becke, and by his instruction. If the first and right
 Lord, in despite of all the Popes fulminations and fire-workes, shall get the honourable day,
 and vpper hand of his enemies; then the holy Father with a cheerfull and pleasant grace, yea
 with fatherly gratulation, opens the rich cabinet of his iewells, I meane the treasurie of his
 indulgences, and falls now to dandle and cocker the King in his fatherly lap, whose throat if
 he could, he would haue cut not long before. 
 This pestilent mischiefe hath now a long time taken roote, and is growne to a great head in
 the Christian world, through the secret, but iust iudgement of God; by whom Christian Kings
 haue beene smitten with a spirit of dizzinesse: Chris- tian Kings, who for many aages past
 haue liued in ignorance, without any sound instruction, without any trew sense and right
 feeling of their owne right and power, whilest vnder a shadow of Religion and false cloake of
 pietie, their King- domes haue beene ouer-burdened, yea ouer-borne with tributes, and their
 Crownes made to stoope euen to miserable bondage. That God in whose hand the hearts of Kings
 are poised, and at his pleasure turned as the water-courses; that mighty God alone, in his
 good time, is able to rouze them out of so deepe a slumber, and to take order (their drowzy
 fits once ouer and shaken off with heroicall spirits) that Popes hereafter shall play no more
 vpon their patience, nor presume to put bits and snaffles in their noble
 mouthes, to the binding vp of their power with weake scruples, like mighty buls lead about by
 litle children with a small twisted thred. To that God, that King of Kings I deuote my
 scepter; at his feet in all humblenes I lay downe my Crowne; to his holy decrees and commaunds
 I will euer be a faithfull seruant, and in his battels a faithfull champion. To conclude; in
 this iust cause and quarrell, I dare send the challenge, and will require no second, to
 maintaine as a defendant of honour, that my brother-Princes and my selfe, whom God hath
 aduanced vpon the Throne of Soueraigne Maiestie and supreame dignity, doe hold the Royall
 dignitie of his Maiestie alone; to whose seruice, as a most humble homager and vassall, I
 consecrate all the glory, honour, splendor, and lustre of my earthly Kingdomes.